This is for the total beginner, and can be taught on the very first lesson. RH play a steady even ostinato using only the note E, while the left hand plays the melody which consists only of ABC in different orders and simple rhythms. Excellent for sightreading, for hand independence, for expressive playing and for bringing up a melody on the left hand. It can also be used as a seed for free improvisation.

Contrapunctus XI is a triple fugue based on the inverted subjects of Contrapunctus VIII. The fugue starts with an exposition based on subject S1, a variation of the Art of the Fugue subject. This subject is the inversion of Contrapunctus VIII' s third subject. The inverted version is also used in this fugue and will be identified as S1. The voices enter in the order alto, soprano, bass and tenor (c1a+). A short episode leads to one more presentation of S1 in the soprano in measure 22 and the section ends in D minor. A new exposition based on subject S2 begins in measure 27. This subject is the inversion of Contrapunctus VIII's first subject. The order of the voices is alto, tenor, bass and soprano ( c1a-). This order is the inversion of the order used in the first exposition. The last voice presents the inverted subject (S2). Long episodes are used between each voice entry (marked with dashed lines). Two important motives are present. One of chromatic character based on the S2 is used in ascending (soprano, measure 28) and descending (bass, measure 30) versions. The other has a more melodic character (alto, measure 31). The section ends in A minor. A new exposition using the inversion of S1 (S1) starts in measure 71. The order is now tenor, soprano, bass and alto (c2t-). The chromatic and melodic motives are used again. The section ends in F major. The longest section of the fugue where Bach uses the 3 subjects begins in measure 89. This is the third subject S3. It is a free inversion of Contrapunctus VIII's second subject. The inverted version will also be used and will be identified as S3. We will divide the section in two parts: a first part (measures 89 to 144) where Bach uses S2 and S3 in original and inverted forms alternating with a few presentations of S1 and a second one where the 3 subjects are simultaneously used. We show only those cases where S3 appears in combination with the other subjects and we have not included all presentation because of numerous variations.
At the end of measure 145 begins the first presentation of the 3 subjects (in Contrapunctus VIII the presentation of the 3 subjects is in measure 147). Subjects S1 are inverted at the tenth in measure 164.

Although Bach inventions may look rather simple, they offer excellent examples of counterpoint techniques. In this article we will analyze the C Major Invention BWV772.
The invention is based on this theme or subject. We first hear the subject in the upper voice. The lower voice then imitates the subject one octave lower. The second measure is a repetition of the first measure but one fifth higher. We will refer to these first measures as the exposition. In measures 3 and 4 Bach presents a sequence based on the subject: The first four notes are transformed by augmentation (rhythmic values are doubled, a 16th note becomes an 8th note) and used as the bass in the sequence
The subject is transformed by inversion (ascending intervals become descending intervals and viceversa) in the upper part.
They look like reflection on a mirror. With these two motives, Bach creates a sequence that will modulate to G Major (dominant key). In measure 5 and 6 the subject appears in its original form in the bass, transformed by inversion in the upper voice while the bass in eight notes reminds us of the augmented subject. The exposition of measures 1 and 2 is repeated in measures 7 and 8 with the following changes:
Bach uses invertible counterpoint at the octave (what was played by the upper voice is now played by the lower voice and viceversa).
The passage is now in the dominant key (G Major). An ascending sequence will now takes us to the D Minor key. In this sequence the subject appears in both voices transformed by inversion. In measures 11 and 12 the sequence from measures 3 and 4 is repeated with the following changes
Invertible counterpoint (what was played by the upper voice is now played by the lower voice and viceversa).
We are now in the D Minor key. Measures 3 and 4 took us from the C Major key to G Major (ascending fifth), now this sequence will take us from D Minor to A Minor (ascending fifth). Measures 13 and 14 are in the A Minor key, the subject is presented in its original form and transformed by inversion . A series of imitations present the subject transformed by inversion (measures 15 and 17) and in its original form (measures 16 and 18). These measures takes us to the F Major key. The same progression used in measures 3 and 11 reappears. This time the subject is in its original form (1) while the augmented motive is inverted (2) and brings us back to C major. 

An average of three identifiable chordal structures are implied in each measure. There are three major modulations--from minor tonic to relative major, to minor dominant, back to tonic--and seven transient modulations. Fifty-four altered tones occur. The meter is quadruple simple. The following table shows the frequency of note values appearing in this Invention.

This piece is a good starting point for fugal playing. The right hand opens with a familiar melodic line, and the left hand follows one measure later with the same melody. There are some very intricate and intense moments throughout the piece, and careful, slow practice is necessary to balance the two distinct voices.

Beautiful lyrical minuet, reflective and slow. This minuet is meant to be played with the previous one in ABA form (minuet in G – minuet  in gm – minuet in G). For beginners omit the ornamentation. For more advanced players there is a lot of scope for learning the art of ornamentation with these two pieces.

Bach’s partitas are much grander and more technically challenging than his English Suites and French Suites, with larger individual movements. The Partita No. 1 in B flat, published in 1726, is quite an upbeat affair, ranging in mood from cheerful and celebratory in the opening movements to ecstatic, almost manic, in its closing gigue. Even when the pace is slow, as in the sarabande, the tone remains distinctly bright and chipper.
A prelude is intended to introduce the listener to the key they will be hearing a lot of in the course of the work and Bach’s Praeludium does a bang-up job of this, feeling its way methodically through the various scale degrees of B flat until we think we know them as old friends. It blithely ignores its other task, however: to warm up the player’s hands with simple passagework. Anyone who has attempted the opening mordent on a 32nd note without first dipping his fingertips in a hot double espresso will know exactly what I mean.
The fireworks begin in earnest in the Allemande, a toccata-like romp of 16th-note chatter up and down the keyboard, often split between the hands. The following movement is not the usual ‘flowing’ French Courante but its more lively Italian cousin, the Corrente, with enough hops, leaps and swagger to almost classify it as a gigue.
The Sarabande is the longest movement in the work, clocking in at a robust 4-5 minutes of performance time. Normally a slow stately dance in triple meter with a distinct inclination to “sit” with some sense of ownership on the 2nd beat of the bar, this sarabande diverts our attention away from the slow pace of harmonic movement in the bass by means of pertly alive and florid elaboration in the treble.
As galanteries Bach puts in a brace of menuets (the fashionable French spelling of “minuet”). The first ticks along in a constant flow of 8th notes like a mechanical clock while the second is all soothing and sustained in a rhythmically even succession of quarter notes.
The Gigue is a breathless vehicle for the keyboardist’s acrobatic skill, as impressive to watch as it is to hear, with hand-crossings between the bass and treble in every bar to create an antiphonal ‘echo’ effect throughout.

The solemn and expressive, recitative character of the melody is reminiscent of Bach's passion music. A direct relationship between the prelude and its fugue, while not readily apparent, is hinted in the long-held durations of the bass in the first ten measures. If one omits the bass pitches of measures 4–7, what remains of measures 1–10 are the pitches C♯, B♯, E, D♯, C♯ of the fugue's subject. The prelude's most memorable motif is an ascending octave leap, which is heard throughout the piece.
At 115 measures in length, and in five voices, this is one of Bach's longest and most densely-crafted fugues. While it contains three themes, it is not properly structured as a triple fugue because only the first idea receives exposition. The other two themes are more in the nature of countersubjects. The five voices are heard at the beginning of the fugue in ascending order, starting with the bass. The subject is heard in stretto in m. 55, and again densely so in mm. 94–99.
The subject (C♯, B♯, E, D♯ C♯) is a cross motif in half and whole notes. The contour of descending half step, ascending diminished fourth, and descending half step is the same as the Advent Chorale "Nun komm, der Heiden Heiland" (Kerman 2005, 28).
The second theme, which enters in measure 36, is a flowing changing-tone motif, in eighth notes, that can be heard as a diminution and motivic transformation of the main subject.
In measure 49, a third theme enters in concert with the prior two. These three are heard as invertible counterpoint in measures 49–88, at which point the second theme drops away. Thereafter, the first and third themes continue to the end, with a striking dissonance on the downbeat of measure 112, four bars before the end.

The prelude is 35 bars long and consists mostly of broken chords. The prelude continues like this with different variations on harmony and change of key. The prelude ends with a single C major chord. The fugue is 27 bars long and is written for four voices. It starts with a two-measure subject in the alto voice. The first voice to join is the soprano, which replies with the answer in the dominant key (G major). The answer is repeated in the tenor and bass voices, respectively, when they enter. The piece then modulates through various related keys, with the subject being repeated in each of the four voices. The piece eventually ends up back in the home key. It ends with each voice stopping at a note and holding it until the end, forming a C-major chord.

The first two measures of the prelude are an elaboration of tonic. There is a chain of suspensions in m. 3 that leads to the secondary dominant (A major) that leads to the dominant (D major), which then leads back to tonic (G minor). The 5th measure begins with a ii-V-I progression and leads to a C dominant seventh chord.
This marks the beginning of a series of modulations moving up a fourth each time. He modulates twice, arriving in B♭ major for the recapitulation of the opening theme in m. 1. A G dominant seventh chord is used in the fourth beat of m 8. Measure 9 marks the beginning of a sequence that lasts two measures and further establishes C minor as tonic. There is another recapitulation of the opening measure in mm. 11, this time in C minor. There is a diminished triad on beat 3 of mm. 12 and a D dominant seventh on the fourth beat as we prepare to modulate back to G minor. There is another C minor chord on the third beat of mm. 13, which turns into a Neapolitan sixth when the top line lands on an A♭ on the fourth beat. The next measure begins on D, which leads to G minor for the second beat.
Tonic (G minor) is then elaborated until mm. 17. There is another Neapolitan chord that leads to a diminished chord on the raised fourth scale degree, providing a leading tone to the D dominant seventh chord with a 4-3 suspension in the soprano. The penultimate measure begins with a pedal tone that last till the end of the prelude. The G minor chord is turned into a G dominant seventh as it modulates to C minor, then a C diminished triad with the pedal tone G in the bass still. Finally, the dissonance is resolved and the piece ends with a Picardy third.
The subject of the fugue begins in G minor. The second voice enters on the pickup to the fourth beat of m. 2, and it begins in the dominant (D minor), even though the first note of the theme is a G in this instance. The third voice enters in m. 5 in the tonic and the fourth a measure later in the dominant once again. The first episode begins in D and modulates to the B♭ major for the recapitulation of the subject. The second episode is in G minor, and it remains in G minor until the end of the piece.

The prelude is 70 bars long, and is written in binary form, of which the first half is 28 bars long and ends in A-flat major. The second half modulates through a variety of keys before returning to the home key of F minor. Below is the opening sentence of the prelude.
The first four measures of this sentence has two voices leading the melody in thirds, and another voice leading the bass line. After four measures, only two voices continue. One voice plays the root of a chord, while the second voice plays a broken chord around it. This continues like so for another four measures, and ends with an imperfect cadence. After this, the sentence is repeated, except modulating to E♭ major at one point and ending on a perfect cadence. Together, these two sentences create a compound period, and the first part of a small binary.
Following the compound period, the second part of the small binary starts. It consists of one voice playing broken chords and two other voices leading a melody, and is eight measures long. A perfect cadence in A♭ major concludes the small binary, and thus ending the theme of the prelude.
The prelude ends with a two-measure codetta, which consists of a perfect cadence in the home key.
The fugue is 85 bars long, and is written for 3 voices. Below is the 4-measure subject of the fugue.
Just like most fugues in the baroque period, the subject is then repeated in the middle voice in the dominant key (C minor), and then repeated once more in the lowest voice, again in the home key. This final repetition of the subject is followed a small episode that consists of a descending fifths sequence. This is followed by the development of the fugue, which has many additional repetitions of the subject in various voices and keys, and occasionally episodes with the same descending fifths sequence as before in between. After the final repetition of the subject in the tonic key, the descending fifths episode is repeated as a codetta with a Picardy third, which concludes the fugue.

To begin his Toccata in C minor BWV 911, Bach takes the measure of his instrument with a pepper spray of 32nd-note runs spanning its entire range from high to low. Soon, however, the ruminative Adagio of imitative counterpoint, full of yearning dissonances and based loosely on the rising harmonic minor scale, lurches pleadingly towards a cadence.

B. had a huge natural gift for variation form, but of the 21 sets of variations he wrote, he only saw fit to give opus numbers to 4 of them. It’s hard to tell exactly why this set never made it, though it’s not so surprising, perhaps, that B. didn’t think too highly of it (there’s an anecdote – unverified – that B. dismissed this set later in life when he heard someone else playing it, saying “Oh, Beethoven, what an ass you were in those days!”). The WoO 80 has none of the Diabelli’s deconstructionist, hyper-architectural leanings, or any of the Eroica’s exploratory playfulness and warmth. Its theme is incredibly short (even terse), none of the variations undertakes any daring transformations of it, and compared to the Diabelli or Eroica the expressive space it occupies is small and overwhelmingly pessimistic – it’s almost always tragic, stormy, threatening, or moody.
But it’s these very features which combine to give this set of variations a concision, power, and expressive directness that’s made it popular ever since publication. The WoO 80 is stylistically Baroque, being a mix of passacaglia and chaconne. The theme consists of both a bass which crawls chromatically downward (while the treble rises from a C to Ab), and a more general harmonic progression. Some variations – the passacaglia-like ones (Vars.1-4, 9, 23-25, 30, 33) – focus on the chromatically descending bass, happily substituting out harmony for colouristic effects as long as bass’s voice-leading is preserved. So the C dominant 7th harmony of the 3rd bar might become a Bb diminished 7th (Vars.1-2) or even Gb (Var. 3, where there’s a lovely chromatic slide from G to F via Gb). The German augmented 6th chord in bar 5 might similarly turn into a D dominant 7th or a Eb diminished 7th, and bar 6’s F minor chord might turn into a D diminished 7th (both happen in Var.24). And then some variations – the chaconne-like ones – forget about voice-leading almost completely and play only on the basic harmony of the theme, but often use the harmonic substitutions already mentioned. It’s interesting to note that the major variations don’t quite fall into either camp, since they are built around a new, mostly *rising* bass line (C-B-C#-D-D#-D-F-F#-D) that’s closely linked to the harmony of the original theme and the contour of its treble (that rise from C to G).
One of the nice side-effects of the straightforwardness of this set of variations (as well as the sparse performance directions) is that it lends itself to a huge range of interpretive approaches. Perahia has the most natural approach to the WoO 80 – tempi are well-judged and kept remarkably steady, even between variations, and the dynamic control is superb throughout. Mustonen, whose interpretation is crystalline and brittle, reminds me of a modern-day Gould – he’s got an aversion to pedal and a fondness to hyper-staccato playing which you hear right from the theme’s opening. He’s also got a rather drastic way of tapering phrases and slurs – in Var.7 the end of each phrase is nearly inaudible, as are the second notes of each slurred pair in Var.33. At Var.18 you can hear how even and detached scales are – it sounds like you’re unzipping the piano, almost. Var.23, usually murkily tragic, is given a menacing, pointillistic rendering. Kissin, as always, has a very expressive way with this set: the faster variations (like the opening ones) are taken very fast, and the slower variations are taken a lot slower, with lots of rubato (see Vars.5, 15-16. There is also some very beautiful contrapuntal (Var.17), and con brio (Var.26-27, 29) playing, and the aura of mystery which pervades Vars.31 and 32 is perfectly captured.

The Op.34 Variations can come across as slight (if very beautiful). In fact, they’re one of the most important sets of variations ever written, as they represent B.’s most successful attempt at large-scale organization in theme and variation form.
A bit of context on this. The major problem of theme and variation form is that – if you think about it – the form has no natural sense of order or finality (contrast this to sonata form). You can, in principle, keep varying on forever, and once the variations get going there is no natural impulse which checks the momentum you’ve built up. One standard way of solving this problem is to use a fugue to end (or almost-end) a set of variations, since a fugue represents the most thorough and internally rigorous way of examining a theme – you put it at the end to say, “And now there’s really nothing more to be said about this theme.” This is what B. does in the Diabelli and Eroica, and what Brahms does in the Haydn/St Antoni. Another method is to imply some large-scale movements within a set of variations: Rachmaninoff was particularly adept at this. And yet another is to end by building into a recapitulative structure – so in the Goldbergs the ending is heralded by the Quodlibet, which breaks the work’s structure by forcefully entering where there should instead be a canon at the 11th, which in turn clues you in to the fact that something special’s going to happen (the return of the aria).
B. uses a little of that last method here, but what is by far and away the most striking aspect of the Op.34 is how B. manages to impose a pattern of almost Schubert-like tonal organization over the set (B. was actually quite proud of this novelty of having every variation in a different key – he told his publisher to ensure that this fact was mentioned in the printed edition). The ingenious thing is not only that this structure exists, but that this structure also acts as a colouristic device: it has one foot in sonata form (structure) and another in variation form (in-the-moment texture). So a set of variations that really is a highly disparate group of character pieces (7 keys, 4 time signatures, various dance forms) sounds coherent and directed in a way no other set of variations B. produced quite manages.
On tonality: the variations move down a chain of 3rds or delayed 5ths (F-D-Bb-G-Eb-Cmin/maj-F) to land on the dominant C, which then sets up the return to the last restatement of the theme (which itself is a pretty clever thing, also serving as final variation and cadenza). It’s striking how sonata-like this scheme is – the end of Var.5 comes right out of a sonata's development section. At the same time, the largely unprepared modulations create some really nice shifts of colour between variations. The entrance of Var.1 in D has an open-ended, expansive feel characteristic of modulation down by minor 3rd (helped also by the higher tessitura), and the move from D to Bb also has a characteristic modulation-down-by-major-3rd feel – something more rounded, closed, warm.
Another structural device that’s first presented as a textural one is the vii diminished 7th over F you hear in bar 6 and which recurs in the 3rd-last bar of the theme. It’s a beautiful expressive device, functioning basically as a rootless dominant 9th floating over the tonic. But it also chains the variations together, because the progression of keys through the piece means that the same diminished 7th harmony (or something very close to it, like a borrowed iv from the parallel minor) is always heard in successive pairs of variations, but each time resolving differently. So in the theme and Var.1, you get E dim.7th (resolving to F and D), in Vars.2-3 you get A dim.7th (resolving to G min/Bb and G), and in Vars.4-5 you get D dim.7th (resolving to Eb and Cmin). There are other decorative devices that also get given structural treatment, such as the F pedal you hear in the first two bars and the dotted rhythm which closes the first phrase of the theme in bar 7: both motifs recur constantly, with the latter opening Vars.2, 4, 5, and 6. 
Some other things worth noting: Var.5 anticipates the second movement of the Eroica Symphony, soon to be written after this work. The florid decoration of Var.1 mimics the sort of technique you usually see at the end of a set of variations, rather than the beginning, and Var.6 follows in the footsteps of the Goldbergs in using something festive and celebratory to anticipate the end of the piece.

These are one page very easy pieces (grade 1) that Beethoven most likely wrote as pedagogical material for is pupils.

Beethoven is supposed to have written the short piano piece for a pupil called ‘Elise’ – but there’s not actually much evidence for that story. In fact, the dedication on the manuscript doesn’t even say Elise, it says ‘Für Therese’. But however it came about, this charming piano work is the perfect piece if you’re just starting out.

The ‘Moonlight’ Sonata is both beautiful and perfect for beginners. The first movement – the most famous section – is also the most straightforward to play.

For easy classical piano pieces, one need look no further than Ludwig Van Beethoven’s immediately recognizable theme from Ode to Joy. The chord structure is simple, given that you can play just three types of chords to accompany the main theme. The right-hand melody consists of quarter notes played over a span of five notes, which means that the piano fingering for this piece is intuitive and easy to remember. 

In the first movement, you’ve got the granite-hewn hardness of the piano’s entry put in violent contrast against the expressiveness of the rising chords at 3:28. And immediately after, the melodic lines at 3:37 and 4:17 are presented improvisationally, with dozens of dynamic dips/rises and microscopic changes in tempo. Even a simple thing like the falling arpeggio at 4:07 is given a steely brilliance that lifts it a notch above what you usually hear.
The second movement is taken at a really slow tempo, but this works wonders – the ending of the movement seems to stretch to musical infinity, and 20:09 becomes into a moving meditation between piano and winds. And I’ve not heard a better handling of the LH tremolo at 17:17, which here dissolves into a translucent haze of sound.
The last movement is taut and combative, filled with jabbing accent, and some surprisingly coy moments (e.g., 28:14, where Argerich plays the alternating high and low phrases very differently: the first rhythmically tight and detached, the second drowsily legato and noticeably slower, with a hair’s-breadth pause between the two). My favourite modulation in all the Beethoven concertos is also handled brilliantly here: the piano cuts off the orchestra mid-sentence at 31:17 by coming in very loud, and with these arrogant agogic accents. And needless to say, the coda is taken at a blistering, reckless speed: 34:24.

The work opens with a coy serving of bite-sized motives: two wistful sighs (falling 5ths), answered by solemn chords below, concluding in an anticlimactic cadence that seems to say: “Just kidding!” Unfolding with devil-may-care breeziness, it arrives at a chipper second theme pertly singing out over a left hand accompaniment churning with bustle. The development section sets out frowningly in the minor mode but soon lightens up and joins the fun as motives get tossed, in comic opera style, between a gruff growling bass and a chirpy echoing treble. A perfectly normal recapitulation wraps up the movement with few surprises.
The second movement Scherzo eschews the muscular vigour, relentless energy, and even the ternary (A-B-A) form characteristic of the most famous Beethoven scherzos in favour of a return to the original Italian meaning of the term: a “joke”. Unexpected pauses and sudden outbursts abound to great comic effect, both sly and slapstick. Beethoven’s humour is very dry here, with a chorale-like marching hymn in the right hand playing out deadpan against a constant left-hand patter of 16th notes, trotting in mock-military precision. Peppery fanfares and “oops-a-daisy” glissando-like pratfalls add to the fun.
Beethoven reveals his immense gifts as a melodist in a Menuetto of the utmost dignity and lyrical grace, worthy of a noble aria by Gluck. The register-leaping Trio ensures that the movement’s smoothness doesn’t devolve into smarminess.
The Presto con fuoco finale is an exhilarating moto perpetuo that has been variously called a gallop or a tarantella. Its breathless pace, prominent horn-call motives, and slightly off-kilter rocking pattern in the left hand, reminiscent of horseback riding, have given the sonata as a whole the nickname The Hunt.

The first movement is in sonata form: it has a repeated exposition with two subject groups, a development section, a recapitulation and a coda.
he movement opens with repeated pianissimo chords in a straightforward but anxious rhythm, devoid of melody for two bars.
It then swiftly ascends, followed by a three-note descent in the middle register and a four-note descent in the upper. This phrase is then repeated starting on B♭ major – a whole tone lower – a device Beethoven also used for the opening of the Sonata No. 16 in G Major (Op. 31 No. 1). After a half cadence to the dominant (G major), the opening phrase returns again but this time in a tremolo variation. The second subject group, marked dolce, is a chordal theme in E major, the mediant key. Modulation to the mediant for the second subject area is another feature shared by this sonata and the Sonata No. 16. Beethoven would employ the same shift again in later works (in the Hammerklavier Sonata, for example).
For the recapitulation, Beethoven transposes the second subject into A major, quickly changing into A minor and then back to C major for the coda.
The Introduzione is a short Adagio in 6
8 time that serves as an introduction to the third movement. This replaced an earlier, longer middle movement, later published as the Andante favori, WoO 57. The music gradually gets more agitated before calming down to segue into the rondo.
The rondo begins with a pianissimo melody played with crossed hands that soon returns fortissimo, over daringly fast scales in the left hand and a continuous trill on the dominant in the right, as described above. The second theme, a series of broken chords in triplets, is soon interrupted by a turbulent section in A minor that foreshadows the central episode.
The music returns to C major and the sweet theme is repeated, followed by a series of staccato octaves in C minor that mark the start of the central episode, one of the few cases where such a melodic change is seen, a tactic repeated in larger works like the Emperor Piano Concerto. Soon the octaves are accompanied by swirling triplets in the left and then the right hand. The music grows more tense and eventually reaches a cadence in C minor. The next section brings back the opening theme in chords and further develops it: it appears in A♭ major (bars 221–224), then F minor (225–228) and then D♭ major (229–232); it is fragmented into shorter phrases (233–238) and then transits into a quiet section with major 7th arpeggios, returning after much drama to the C major theme played fortissimo.
The second theme reappears, followed by another characteristic long line of beautiful dance-like music. Another series of fortissimo chords announces a short, delicate pianissimo section: the movement seems to die away but then unexpectedly segues into a virtuosic prestissimo coda that plays with the various themes of the movement, ending in a triumphant rush of grandeur.

Piano Sonata No. 29 in B-Flat Major, Op. 106 (also known as the Große Sonate für das Hammerklavier, or more simply as the Hammerklavier) is known as one of the greatest piano sonatas of all time. The piece is often considered to be Beethoven‘s most technically challenging piano composition and one of the most demanding solo works in all of classical music. The sonata was composed in 1817-1818 and was dedicated to Beethoven‘s patron, Archduke Rudolph. The Hammerklavier set a precedent with a standard performance length of 45-50 minutes (previous concerto movements were typically 15-20 minutes). 
The work was admired but received as nearly unplayable by many pianists. It requires incredible dexterity and a stunning level of stamina to complete the piece. Even classical pianist Emanuel Ax stated that he believes himself too old to now learn the sonata. The time investment required both to learn and to play the piece make it a challenge many musicians simply choose not to face.

For some reason (probably its diminutive proportions?) the 6th sonata has acquired a reputation as one of B.’s less important sonatas, when any reasonably objective look will show that it really is one of his best.  For a start, the first movement bursts with innovative touches: the lush lyrical sonority of the first theme of the second theme group (which implies maj7 harmony), the really unexpected harmonic turns (at 0:17 we get a really abrupt transition from F to E, and then, this time completely without preparation, we move from E to C – a pretty radical treatment of the usual transition between two theme groups), a development section which doggedly avoids all connection with the exposition with the exception of a microscopic ending phrase, and a recapitulation that begins in D(!), a key so far removed from F that it sounds like a lot of the tonal tension that ought to be in the development has decided to accrete there. 
The second movement continues this sonata’s typifying feature of experimentation with sonority: it’s technically a kind of minuet/trio, but texturally is something more like a doleful bagatelle, again with beautiful textures at the return of the minuet. The last movement is just one of *the best* things B. ever wrote – a roguish, scampering, hyper-orchestral thing that never becomes anything like properly fugal yet sounds a lot like a fugue, and which contains sudden windows of translucent, luminous color: see 11:54 and 12:26, for instance. I find this final movement kind of earwormish, in fact, but that might be just me.
MVT I, Allegro
00:00 – Theme Group 1, containing two themes: the first short and angular, the second long and lyrical. The restatement of the first theme suddenly slips into E(!) maj.
00:21 – Theme Group 2, Theme 1, now blithely on C, which then modulates to G. At 0:34 dominant preparation, which is surprising as the key is already clear
00:42 – TG2, T2. Its closing uses the turn motif (M1) from the opening theme
01:02 – TG2, T3 (cadential theme). At 1:13 the closing three notes constitute M2
DEVELOPMENT
02:29 – M2, in A min, then in D min in bass with new counterpoint (x) above. Parts swap.
02:40 – Development Theme. D min – C min – Bb
03:00 – M2 + (x)
RECAPITULATION
03:26 – TG1, in D(!), a key more remote than any reached in the development. The repeat at 3:42 moves wistfully in to G min, then into the home dominant. The turn motif now repeats several times before TG1, T2 enters in F
03:58 – TG2, T1. At 4:08 theme is extended in F min, then Ab. The point of the “purposeless” dominant preparation (0:34) in the exposition is now revealed, for it now enters to right the course of the sonata by insisting on C.
04:26 – TG2, T2
04:47 – TG2, T3 (cadential theme). Note how its closing segues seamless back into the beginning of the development
MVT II, Allegretto
07:37 – Menuet. Middle strain at 7:52, with imitative counterpoint
08:55 – Trio, with a surprising amount of development. Closes in bare octaves moving into dominant
10:30 – Menuet, with some particularly beautiful variation (primarily syncopation, some changes in melodic direction, and fuller LH). Note the close on forte, rather than the original piano.
MVT III, Presto
EXPOSITION
11:17 – Theme 1. First two bars with M1, second two with M2.
11:32 – Theme 2 (Cadence). Note M1 in inner part
DEVELOPMENT
12:02 – Compound of M1+M2, rising in Ab. At 12:04 T1 in Ab.
12:07 – T1, with LH following RH in 3rds. M2 is then developed imitatively. Bb min/F min
12:14 – M2 dialogue with itself in RH. C min/G min/D min. At 12:22 preparation on dominant of D min
12:26 – T2 in A, with its bass now prominently in upper voice. Descends sequentially to
RECAPITULATION
12:39 – T1, with running counterpoint, and later diverted into G min/Bb/Bb min. at 12:58 sequence is initiated leading back into F
13:05 – T2 (extended into a kind of coda)

In the 1st movement nearly everything is built up from the first line of music – the motifs of a arpeggio, scale, and turn. It’s kind of impossible to unhear once you know they’re there, and it’s a level of motivic integration that represents the perfection of the technique Haydn developed. There’s also the incredibly dramatic use of long (developed) recitative-like passages as contrast to passages of searing intensity, and the introduction of wonderfully dark new material in the recapitulation. The 2nd movement is unreasonably beautiful, and the famous 3rd features some of the most gorgeous modulations ever put to paper. Note also how the dramatic movement happens not in the (almost unchanging) figuration, but in the harmony, where turbulence and restlessness is often followed by *very* long periods of total harmonic stasis [e.g., 23:21], usually as a dominant preparation.
MVT I
EXPOSITION
00:00 – Theme Group 1, Motif A (Rising Arpeggio)
00:14 – TG1, Motif B (Scalar Passage, with notes in groups of 2)
00:18 – TG1, Motif C (Turn)
00:24 – Counterstatement of TG 1, entering in a surprise E6, the dominant of III
00:37 – Motif B
00:48 – Transition (or an extension of TG 1): Motif A rising in bass, answered by Motif C in RH. Surprisingly substantial.
01:06 – Theme Group 2, Theme 1 (= Motif B!, with Motif C in the LH.) A minor.
01:18 – TG2, Theme 2 (= Motif C, with lengthened 2nd note)
01:26 – TG2, Theme 2, with Motif C now in the deep bass 
01:31 – TG2, Theme 3 (Cadential Theme)
DEVELOPMENT
03:51 – Motif A, repeated thrice, arriving in F#
04:37 – Transition Theme (Motif A + C), sequentially deployed, rising constantly
04:58 – 22(!) bars of dominant preparation, totally devoid of any thematic allusion. Short recitative (with a little Neapolitan Eb) leads into
RECAPITULATION
05:19 – TG1, with 4 bars of recitative attached to each statement of the largo. This section hangs on a Ab, which is transformed
06:43 – into a G# (in enharmonic implied Gb minor!) in a darkly guttural 4 chords. This ushers in a extraordinary modulating section.
06:55 – TG2, in tonic.
07:36 – CODA
MVT II
EXPOSITION
07:59 – Theme 1. (Motif A = rising double-dotted 3-note figure)
09:38 – Transition, with stately rising theme. (Motif B = drumroll in bass)
10:55 – Theme 2. At 11:42 Motif B enters, building into dominant minor 9th chord
RECAPITULATION
12:08 – Theme 1, with Motif A immediately used as inner voice. At 13:00 a demisemiquaver accompaniment drifts down the keyboard
13:42 – Transition
14:54 – Theme 2
CODA
15:42 – Motif B, again building into a dominant minor 9th
16:26 – Motif A, rounded-off, in LH then RH
16:45 – Recalling Theme 1
17:19 – A new, 2-bar long 3rd theme enters and is repeated in the middle voice, before the movement ends.
MVT III
EXPOSITION
18:06 – Theme Group 1, Theme 1. A single motif (Motif A) repeated 16 times in RH. Note codetta with chromatic descending line
18:29 – Transition. Theme 1 in bass, interspersed with arpeggiated figure
18:38 – Theme Group 2, Theme 1, entering with insistent hemiola and 6 bars of dominant harmony
18:55 – TG2, Theme 2
19:05 – TG2, Theme 3 (Cadential Theme)
DEVELOPMENT
20:26 – Motif A in dim7 of iv, modulating into A min
20:37 – The bass uses Motif A to climb up a dim7 in D min, then shifts to D min harmony, then shifts into C min by flattening the A and introducing the inversion of Motif A in the RH. Then movement into the dim7 of Bb min
20:54 – Dramatic entrance of inverted A motif in RH, while LH climbs up bass chromatically.
21:06 – TG1 Theme 1, in Bb min
21:12 – Chromatic rising, landing on a dominant 7, suddenly revealed 
21:19 – to be a augmented 6th when it resolves into the dominant of D min
21:23 – Dominant preparation begins, oscillating between G min and D min
21:41 – 16 bars of continuous descent to the home dominant
RECAPITULATION
21:53 – TG1, Theme 1. The bII in bar 18 becomes the subdominant of Bb, introduction a surprisingly lyrical passage.
22:14 – Transition. Tonal movement around circle of 5ths. G min harmony becomes augmented 6th chord, leading back into
22:34 – D min, TG2. Note how at 23:00 (Theme 3) Beethoven omits the expected high G, since his piano didn’t have the note, and substitutes a really nice repetition of the high D instead.
CODA
23:12 – Mimicking the beginning of the development, without forte outbursts
23:21 – for 16 bars(!) we dwell on the dominant, leading to
23:33 – a violent restatement of TG1 Theme 1, with an A pedal in the highest registers
23:54 – The original codetta from Theme 1 is now presented in full. With another familiar tonic-dominant swing the sonata ends.

This G major Allegro has all the hallmarks of the early Classical style: an Alberti bass, scalic passages, a sparse texture and a firm sense of key. While moderato is the suggested tempo, the movement flows nicely at approximately crotchet equals 120 beats per minute.

This sonata’s link with music of the past is most evident in its formal design. It comprises a single sonata-form movement in the traditional layout of exposition (repeated), development and recapitulation. However, its principal melodic motives, presented in its two opening bars, are distinctly modern. These include (a) the intervals of a perfect 4th and a tritone, announced in the opening bar in a dotted rhythm, and (b) a sequence of falling thirds in the following bar. Appreciating the development of these motives in a densely contrapuntal texture of competing melodies and echoing imitations is one of the main challenges this work presents to listeners accustomed to, shall we say, ‘lighter fare’.
And yet the overall pattern of musical gesture remains strangely familiar. The music is doled out in distinct phrases, some arranged in repeating sequences with expansive swells of ecstatic emotion, just as in the music of Scriabin. As to the overall architecture of the work, the listener is left in no doubt as to where the climax of the piece is. It’s in the middle of the development section, with the dynamic marking ffff  (quadruple forte) being the dead-give-away clue.
What may at first be off-putting is the dissonant harmonic vocabulary, but even here the composer keeps one foot in the chromatic practices of Late Romanticism, in the unresolved harmonic yearnings of Wagner in particular. The overall impression created by this sonata, then, is of 19th-century musical emotions expressed in the bold new harmonic rhetoric of the 20th century, a Romantic picture viewed in a cracked mirror, an old watch picked out of the clear waters of a lake, encrusted with barnacles but still ticking.

A nervous stutter of echoing repeated notes marks the opening section of the Intermezzo in E minor Op. 119 No. 2, its bar lines obscured by rhythmic activity artfully out of synch with the meter and harmony. The gentle waltz that inhabits the middle section provides more rhythmic clarity, but this section’s melodic contrast is deceptive, as its voluptuously lilting tune is actually just a variation of the opening.

The piece begins in the first inversion of the A♭ major chord, a Neapolitan chord, which implies a majestic aura, ending in a dissonant left-hand chord D, G, and E♭ that is not resolved until later on in the piece. Though Chopin's original manuscript clearly marks an E♭ as the top note, the chord has caused some degree of controversy, and thus, some versions of the work – such as the Klindworth edition – include D, G, D as an ossia.
The main section of the ballade is built from two main themes. The brief introduction fades into the first theme in G minor, introduced at measure 8. After dramatic development, the second theme in E♭ major is introduced softly at measure 68. The exposition is once again followed by development, in which the two themes, transferred to another tonal center (A minor and A major), undergo transformation. Then, a reprise presents the two themes in their original keys, albeit in reverse order.
A thundering chord introduces the coda, marked Presto con fuoco, to which the initial Neapolitan harmony re-emerges in constant dynamic forward propulsion, which eventually ends the piece in a fiery double octave scale run down the keyboard.
As a whole, the piece is structurally complex and not strictly confined to any particular form, but incorporates ideas from mainly the sonata and variation forms. A distinguishing feature is its time signature. While the other three ballades are written in strict compound duple time with a 6 8 time signature, Ballade No. 1 bears deviations from this. The introduction is written in 4 4 time, and the more extensive Presto con fuoco coda is written in 2
2 or 4
4. The rest of the piece is written in 6
4, rather than the 6
8 which characterizes the others. It is also considered one of Chopin's most technically and musically demanding works.

EXPOSITION
Theme 1, F maj, a siciliano/pastoral
Theme 2, A min
DEVELOPMENT/FALSE REPRISE
Theme 1, F maj. Looks like a reprise, but –
veers off course, into harmonically complex modulatory territory. This section is where the heavy lifting that shifts the entire tonal centre of the work takes place.
Theme 2 [In D min, which is revealed to be a suspension that resolves to A min. This section substitutes for a reprise proper.]


Chopin’s Ballades are the first known works written for piano under this name, likely meant to summon up associations with traditional folk tales recounted in a popular style of story-telling. Formally, the ballades bear some relationship to sonata form, with contrasting 1st and 2nd themes in different keys. Unlike sonata form, however, they are end-weighted: the story they tell increases in dramatic intensity as it goes along, culminating in either a grand apotheosis or, in the case of the Ballade in F minor (1842-43), in a bravura coda that storms to its conclusion in a whirl of fiery figuration.
To hear the innocent bell-like opening of this work, there would be little to predict its end. A blissful peace seems to reign unperturbed but the melancholy little waltz that arrives as the work’s 1st theme tells another story. Here the repeated bell tones heard in the opening carry real pathos, and are made more plangent and urgent when repeated with a countermelody in the alto.
The 2nd theme, a lilting barcarolle with the solemnity of a chorale, brings consoling relief and even a touch of gaiety to the story, until the 1st theme’s haunting presence begins to hover again. But then … magic! The bell tones of introduction return and we enter a kind of suspended animation as the narrative stops to gaze up at the sky.
But the 1st theme’s lament intrudes on the daydream, circling round itself introspectively in close imitation (imitative counterpoint, in Chopin!) before setting off on yet another thematic variation, this time more turbulent and more expansive. The 2nd theme follows, but it, too, finds itself riding on wave after wave of left-hand turbulence culminating in a showdown of keyboard-sweeping arpeggios and cannonades of block chords until … magic again! Another pin-dropping pause.
Five angelic chords descend from Heaven but cannot stem for long the coda’s hellbent fury, a fury that drives the work to its apocalyptic conclusion with bitter and tragic resolve.

With a tempo marking of Allegro and a metronome marking of minimum equals 69 beats per minute, as a pianist you already find yourself on the back foot. This Etude (or study), was part of a set of studies Chopin composed between 1832 and 1837. This particular study is the sixth of twelve in the set. It has also earned a nickname for the study in thirds as the piece is full of right hand fast moving semi-quavers, at the interval of a third. Playing in thirds is quite a difficult technique to master and Chopin was well aware of this. As such he devotes the entire study to demonstrating how astonishing he must have been to be able to perform this piece. 
That said it is a wonderfully joyful piece even though it’s key is minor. Chopin employs so many of the hallmarks of his compositional and pianistic style to this short composition is a miniature masterpiece and one that offers a challenge to even the best pianists today.

The Fantaisie-Impromptu was written in 1834, but unlike other works that were written during this year, Chopin never published the Fantaisie-Impromptu. Instead, Julian Fontana published it posthumously, along with other waltzes. This piece has proved to be difficult to pianists for many reasons, one being that each of the hands play in a different meter: the right in duple time, the left in triple time. It also features a middle section in D♭ major, while the beginning and end of the piece are in C♯ minor. 

Spontaneity is the feature most prized in the genre named for it, the impromptu. Chopin projects an air of extemporaneous improvisation in his Impromptu in A flat (1837) by means of swirling arabesques of triplets spun effortlessly out of a simple harmonic pattern, the very image of a bubbling fountain of inspiration. Deeper waters are plumbed in the more pensive middle section in F minor, but here, too, the notion of fresh musical thoughts, spontaneously imagined, is upheld by the lavishly decorative, operatic-style ornamentation of a starkly simple melody.

The Mazurka in F major Op. 68 No. 3 is a product of Chopin’s early years, before he arrived in Paris, and must surely count as one of the most naively simple pieces he ever wrote. The uniform chordal texture and repetitive military rhythm of its opening section suggests a patriotic march, perhaps of a village band, while its crude contrasts of tonal colour bespeak the limited harmonic vocabulary of rural music-making. Most clearly folk-like are the drone 5ths of its middle section, supporting a fife-like lydian melody (with sharpened 4th degree) in the treble high above.

The piece is marked Lento con gran espressione and is written in common time. After a soft, sad introduction, the main theme starts at bar 5, with the left hand playing broken chords in legato slurs throughout the section, imparting a haunting and continuous quality to the music. The theme then shifts to a dreamy pianissimo in bar 21, before returning to the original theme in bar 47, and finally ending in C♯ major. The first two bars of the theme from the middle section (bars 21 and 22), resemble the main theme from the third movement of Chopin's second piano concerto in F minor, which was composed around the same time (1829). The next two bars (bars 23 and 24) resemble the second part of the secondary theme of the first movement from his second piano concerto. The passage in the middle section of the nocturne in 3/4 time starting in bar 33 resembles the scherzando section of the third movement of the second piano concerto starting in bar 145 in which the left and right hand are playing an octave apart. In bars 58-61, there are 4 different tuplets; an 18-tuplet, a 35-tuplet, an 11-tuplet, and a 13-tuplet, all of which run through the E Major scale. The piece ends in pianississimo with a high and low C#.

This nocturne has a rhythmic freedom that came to characterize Chopin's later work. The left hand has an unbroken sequence of eighth notes in simple arpeggios throughout the entire piece, while the right hand moves with freedom, occasionally in patterns of seven, eleven, twenty, and twenty-two in the form of polyrhythms. The piece is 85 measures long and in 6/4 meter. It is written in ternary form; after the primary theme, the secondary theme starts in measure 19, followed by a modified version of the primary theme in measure 70. The opening section moves into a contrasting middle section in the same key signature, which flows back to the opening material in a transitional passage where the melody floats above seventeen consecutive bars of D-flat major chords. The reprise of the first section grows out of this, followed by a Picardy third ending. 

This piece takes the listener through a thunderstorm. The song begins with gentle raindrops,  then moves to a dramatic bout of thunder and lightning, and eventually back to rain that slowly fades away. This piece requires diverse skills to accomplish the quiet raindrop effect in the beginning as well as to execute the bold thunderstorm section.

The prelude starts with an eight measures phrase based on a simple harmonic progression. The first four measures of the phrase have an ascending melodic motion while the last four measures have a descending one. A twice repeated ascending second motive (G-A) is transported an ascending third in the fourth measure. In measure 5, the motive transforms into a descending second. The melodic motive appears as an inner voice transformed by augmentation. The use of a 2/8 meter with triplets makes it somewhat challenging to read. We find up to 4 voices in this dense musical texture. The first four measures of the second phrase are identical to those of the first one, but on measure 13, the ascending movement continue and the chromatism increases. The last phrase ends the prelude over a tonic pedal. 

If you are looking for a short classical piano piece, Frédéric Chopin’s Prelude No. 7 in A Major is perfect. It blends beautiful harmonies and a lilting melody to create a sense of contentment and suspending time. While the harmonies are intricate, the left-hand uses a similar style to Satie’s piece, mentioned above, in that you can study just the first beat of each measure of the left-hand to help you see the pattern. There are four chords to learn, which are then repeated a second time. When playing hands together, there are a few places where the hands overlap. Depending on your hand size and shape, you may decide to roll a chord by playing the notes from the bottom to the top, creating a harp-like effect. Or you can redistribute notes between the hands so it feels more comfortable.

Harmonically, the first two measures are very simple. The second measure is a repetition of the first. In this prelude we find the main theme on the right hand as an interior voice. Most of the notes in the upper voice (32ths) reinforce the theme and harmony yet there are several appoggiaturas (diatonic and chromatic). The G# and B in the 1st and 2nd beat, the A# and C# in the 3rd beat and the B# and D in the 4th beat are an example. The next two measures are more interesting. The progression II - V from the previous measure is developed and used in measure 3 in the keys of C# minor and B minor. Note the chromaticism of these measures. The dominant seventh chord in the 4th beat of measure 3 descends chromatically to another seventh chord (F#7 - F7). We can analyze the F#7 chord as a German augmented sixth chord (Gb - Bb - Db - E) of Bb. Note that the augmented sixth / minor seventh of the chord (E) moves downward instead of upward as a normal augmented sixth. The purpose is to have the seventh in the dominant seventh chord. In the next example you can see: a) how a dominant seventh chord is transformed into a German sixth; b) how this chord would normally resolve and; c) how Chopin uses this chord. There are other examples with similar voice movements in romantic literature. But what makes this example remarkable is that Chopin seems to have discovered the beauty of parallel movement of chords. As we will see, he will develop this procedure in other parts of the prelude.
In the 4th measure the diminished seventh chord of A minor is transformed into a diminished seventh chord of F# to return to the key of F# minor. Note that both chords are enharmonically the same chords ( G# - B - D - F = E# - G# - B - D).
The inner voice is also highly chromatic. Measures 5 and 6 are almost identical to measures 1 and 2. The only difference is in beats 3 and 4 of measure 6. Here, the VII degree chord of F# minor (E#, G#, B, D) is used as VII degree of A minor (E# = F) and followed by A minor's dominant seventh. Measures 7 and 8 are a variation of measures 3 and 4. The melody is transposed an ascending minor 3rd. The harmony in the first 2 beats is exactly the same (a minor 3rd higher), but from then on Chopin moves chromatically the dominant seventh chords. Each seventh chord can be analyzed as the German sixth of the next chord. The last chord will be used as a German Sixth chord. It will resolve into a Bb tonic in 2nd inversion.
The series of dominant chords moving chromatically can also be explained using the tritone substitution concept from jazz theory. Tritone substitution is the substitution of a dominant chord by another dominant chord that shares the same tritone and that is at the distance of tritone from the first chord. For example, G7 can be substituted by Db7 because they both share the same tritone (B - F and F - Cb). Measures 9 to 12 are in the key of Bb major. In measures 9 and 10 we find a series of dominant and diminished seventh chords over a dominant pedal.In measures 15 to 18, Chopin seems to prepare a cadence to Eb minor by repeating the II - V progressions four times. Yet, a dominant seventh chord is used to return to F# minor. Measures 19 and 20 are exactly the same as measures 5 - 6. They are a recapitulation before a coda to end the prelude.
In measure 21, Chopin starts an ascending progression that goes to B minor, C# minor and finally G minor. In measure 22, the V7 of G minor is used as a German augmented sixth chord of F# minor to prepare a coda in this key.

In the case the technique required in the opening bars is playing long, loud descending runs, which forms a dominant seventh chord introductory build-up to the main theme. The length and the repetition of these rapid passages distinguishes the "Revolutionary" from other études. The rest of the passage focuses on the left hand fingering scales and arpeggios. Although the greatest challenge lies with the relentless left hand semiquavers, the right hand is also challenged by the cross-rhythms which are used with increasing sophistication to handle the same theme in various successive parallel passages. The left hand technique in this piece involves evenly played semiquavers throughout. The structure is of the strophic form (A–A′–coda)[example needed]. Some may also argue that it is of the ternary form (A–B–A–coda). The opening broken chords (diminished chord with an added passing note) and downward passages transition into the main appassionato melody. The octave melody's dotted rhythms and the continuous accompaniment give an impression of tension. The piece ends by recalling the opening in a final descending sweep (with both hands) descending to a C major chord, although within a context that draws its expected function as a resolution into question.

Many of the characteristics of Chopin’s mature style are already present in this four-movement work. It is written for a large hand and takes for granted a virtuoso’s mastery of octave and double-note technique. Its heavy and imposing first movement features a melodically active bass line, strongly imitative texture, and a desire for rhythmic fulness that keeps up a chatter of 8th notes in practically every bar, aided and abetted by a certain contrapuntal chumminess of melody and countermelody that lends a charmingly conversational quality to the right-hand writing, in particular.
Unusual in this movement, however, is its lack of a lyrical second theme in a different key: the work opens by planting its flag in C minor and sits there in lawn chair for the entire exposition. But the development section, by way of compensation, is as chromatically colourful as a bowl of Smarties.
The second movement is the only minuet that Chopin ever wrote and the indication scherzando gives us a hint that crinoline petticoats and powdered wigs were not what he had in mind when writing it. The acrobatic triplet figures in the opening section and mock-seriousness of the E flat minor trio point more in the direction of sly parody than courtly hommage.
The Larghetto that follows, however, is in dead earnest in its lyrical intentions although experimental in their implementation. Written in a highly unusual 5/4 meter, its rhythmic pulse is somewhat difficult to pin down. The ornamentation of the right-hand melody into prime-number groupings of 3s, 5s and 7s against a stable left-hand accompaniment of duple 8th notes presages the operatic arias of the concerti slow movements and the moonlit meditations of the nocturnes.
A tumultuous rondo finale ends the work with a virtuoso display of scintillating passagework regularly interrupted by its thumping principal theme, a kind of Wanderer Fantasy gone over to the dark side in the minor mode. Eruptive surges from the depths of the keyboard, much akin to the deleterious effects of acid reflux, alternate with brilliant cascades of keyboard colour in the treble to end this sonata in a style worthy of a full-on concerto.

The sonata opens with a dramatic gesture: a plunging diminished 7th in bass octaves, like a corpse being heaved into a grave, or maybe simply a nod to the stark opening of Beethoven’s last sonata Op. 111, but in slow motion. Transformed into a grim cadence, it issues into a first theme in doppio movimento (double time) that spills out in panting fragments of melody riding atop an agitated accompaniment in a constant horse-hoof rhythm. The momentum slows rapidly at the appearance of a peaceful and consoling second theme in the major mode, but this theme is set aside during a development section that transforms the first theme’s stuttering utterances into convulsive spasms of a passionate intensity. It is perhaps for this reason that it is the poised lyricism of the placid second theme that dominates the recapitulation to take the movement to unsuspected heights of glory in its luminous final bars.
A drama of contrasting poles of emotion, the explosive vs. the reflective, plays out once again in the scherzo that follows. The movement begins with a powerful crescendo of jackhammer octaves that establishes a mood of brutal resolve and muscular exuberance that is interrupted by an episode of lyrical daydreaming. This middle section, with its sleepy, repetitious melody and gentle left-hand murmurings, is hypnotic, almost static, breathed out in a series of long sighs that are recalled at the very end of the movement, even after the opening turmoil has returned.
The emotional centre-weight of this sonata is its third movement, the famous funeral march that was destined to accompany John F. Kennedy, Winston Churchill, and Chopin himself to their graves. With its incessant dotted rhythm and plodding, drone-like bass, it solemnly paces onward in the style of funeral marches from the French Revolution, of the sort that Beethoven memorialized in his Eroica Symphony and his Sonata in A at Op. 26. The grieving footfall yields, however, to a surprisingly innocent, almost childlike melody in a middle section that displays Chopin’s mastery of pedal-enhanced piano tone. This melody is enveloped by a haze of overtones drifting up from a nocturne-like pattern of accompaniment figures that stretch over two octaves in the left hand, seamlessly connecting it to the sound world of the sombre dirge at its return.

Dalcroze or other movement activities can help students feel the waltz style and can address issues of coordination, syncopation, and accents found in this piece. There are many great resources online and in print.
Audiation of the melodic rhythm while tapping the pulse with the left hand is another way to internalize the coordination required for this piece.
Listen to waltzes in different styles and by different composers to assist with stylistic understanding. In addition to piano music, be sure to listen to orchestras and string quartets play waltzes to help students hear the layering of the parts.
Technical Preview: This waltz contains some unusual technical elements. Practice chromatic scale fingerings (using 4) and create some short double-note drills based on the patterns found in this waltz.
The Harmony: There are only a few chords in this piece, with lots of repetition. A harmonic analysis will ease the reading load and help your student feel the phrasing. This is also really great for memorization.
The Bass Line: It can be a challenge for students to hear the downbeat bass note as a melodic line. Isolate this part by playing it legato and singing along. I find that students are much more willing to sing if I am singing with them!
The Melody: Model the physical gestures that are indicated in the melody (slur groups, accents, legato touch, etc.). My students enjoy a call-and-response approach to this where I model a short phrase and they try to imitate everything that I did.
The Chromatic Scales: These can be tricky. Compare, contrast, and drill the measures where they are used - mm. 47-52 with mm. 56-60.
General Tip: Practice in chunks, alternating reading with rote (ear) playing, with a focus on physical comfort and smooth finger crossings.
Facility in the Keys of B Major and Minor: Comfort and fluency in these keys is essential for mastery of the complex coordination challenges of this waltz. These include scales, chords, and double thirds.
Fluency with Chromatic Scales: Not all chromatic scale passages are limited to fingers 1, 2, and 3. The patterns in this waltz require the use of 4 as well.
Fingerings: There are many expansion and contractions of the right hand in this melody resulting in complicated fingerings. Isolate complex fingering shifts such as in mm. 7-10 and mm. 12-16, until smooth and easy.
The Jump Bass: This requires speed and accuracy, as well a relaxed hand and wrist. Understanding the choreography of motions is essential.
Chord Voicings: Voicing the tops of the chords in the left-hand waltz bass can give shape and direction to the accompaniment.

Designed for late intermediate to advanced pianists, the Art of Finger Dexterity, Op. 740 has been widely praised for combining beautiful music with highly effective finger training. The systematic exercises Czerny devised for developing finger dexterity are as useful today as when they were first written. Each exercise is preceded by a statement of specific goals. Exercises range from achieving even finger action with a quiet hand to virtuoso studies that emphasize affectations such as the ‘bravura touch’. 

The prelude begins with a harmonic progression in B flat major ending over a dominant chord (measures 1 to 5). The thematic material as an internal voice appears. A dominant pedal is in measures 3 to 4. The passage is repeated. The melody is doubled at the octave, and syncopated chords added. Development begins at measure 11. In the previous measures, Debussy used traditional harmonic function, but this will not be the case in the following measures.
A pentatonic melodic line using the first measures' rhythmic motive sings over a dominant ninth chord. The melody adds extensions to the chord. Major and minor triads in parallel motion start as an internal voice but cross the pentatonic melody. The E natural makes the A chord a minor, perfect chord. A similar process is repeated in measures 13 and 14, this time over a minor seventh chord. Development of the melodic material presented in the first measures appears in measures 15 to 20. With added syncopated chords. Measures 21 to 24 lead us to a recapitulation. The last notes from the previous measures are developed in measures 21 and 22. Note the minor third intervals in the melody and the syncopated chords. The top voice uses minor triads arpeggios and is imitated by syncopated chords at the distance of a minor third. A short recapitulation appears in measures 25 and 26. The melodic material now uses major and augmented triads.
Tonic and dominant chords are used in measures 27 and 28. The last three measures end with a simple Bb major triad.

In The Little Nigar, he alluded to banjo chords and drums, influenced by American minstrel shows. The piece, marked allegro, begins with a first theme presenting "jazzy" syncopes in 2 4 time, in the then popular ragtime style.[It is followed by a lyrical passage, marked espressivo and pianissimo (very softly), which leads to a return of the first section. The first theme leans towards pentatonic and is accompanied by a chromatic sequence of broken minor thirds.

Literally meaning ‘Springtime’, this simple, meditative piece for solo piano is wonderfully satisfying to play. Written in E flat, it’s built on a signature Einaudi left-hand accompaniment of repeating broken chords and Alberti bass patterns. Then, a beautiful, twinkling melody soars over the top.

Variations in C# minor were written in 1895 and may well have been inspired, in general spirit and occasionally in texture, by the example of Schumann’s Symphonic Études in the same key. The theme is a kind of march of imposing gravity, modally inflected, in a rhythmically repetitive pattern, and curiously configured with accents on weak beats of the bar. It consists of a simple C sharp minor scale rising up an octave and then lurching back down again by stages. Eleven variations follow, beginning at first with simple ornamentations and textural elaborations, but soon developing into something much more distant from its initial melodic and harmonic outline.
There are no ‘genre’ variations, as such, although dancelike elements do occur. Rather, the very DNA of the theme is spun out in fantastical ways, some passing through a time warp to don the apparel of a Bach invention, others floating more freely in sonic space, held together by strands of imitative counterpoint unimaginable in the era of the Cantor of Leipzig. The ninth variation seems to be walking on the moon. Typical of Fauré, he avoids ending with a bombastic ‘crowd-pleasing’ variation as a cue for audience applause, but rather exits softly, in refined style, in a final meditative variation in the major mode. 

When considering easy classical piano pieces, Romantic composer Edvard Grieg’s Morning Mood from Peer Gynt Op.13 is a good choice because of its use of patterns. The theme is meant to evoke the rising of the sun for the fourth act of Henrik Ibsen’s play of the same name. The left-hand features two rolling chords, while the right-hand consists of a steady succession of notes going down and then up. Each time the melody repeats, it might move to an octave higher or change just one note at the end of the phrase. 

The piece requires nimble fingers, particularly for the quick middle section, along with confident agility in the LH, which features leaps of over an octave. Large hands are not necessary however, as no wide stretches are required.
The character of the music will probably appeal particularly to older students, rather than the very young.
The piece is essentially a dance, so there must be a sense of movement in the pace.
The outer sections are certainly suggestive of a waltz in terms of metre and character, although it is clear that the music needs a rubato style that suggests a concert waltz to be listened to, rather than music that might actually accompany dancing.
The middle section is much quicker and the sense of energy here surprisingly conjures up a fleet-footed, whirling, folk dance rather than a waltz.
A feel for the lyrical music will best be expressed in sensitive use of rubato, which may be used quite liberally, as well as in musically graded dynamics.
Listening to the piece played stylishly, either by the teacher or on a recording, will guide the student in developing tasteful and appropriate rubato.
The style, in common with many Romantic pieces, is one of melody and accompaniment so the RH needs a singing tone accompanied by a quieter LH.
The main technical challenge of this piece is the fast playing in the middle section.
It will only be possible to play the RH fast with hands together if the LH is well known too.
The fingering suggested in the Peters’ edition of 1884 has much to recommend it.

This lovely movement is to be played in a dignified and measured tempo. For the more musically mature student, the following technique is suggested, but is by no means obligatory for less competent students. Holding down the chord notes beyond their notated value at bars 8-10, 12, 13, and 18 provides an insight into the way the melody sometimes makes counterpoint with itself – the top RH notes connect up (in bar 9, the B and then the D, the C and then the E). Over-holding in this way was a performance practice that was sometimes notated with tie marks and sometimes left to the player’s discretion, so it is not possible to say for sure whether Handel meant these chords to be played like that. The idea was to prolong the sound so that the chord would ring pleasantly through the instrument and give an extra dimension to the texture.

The Chaconne in G major with twenty-one variations was published as ‘Suite No 2’ in the 1733 collection. This magnificent piece is Handel at his most Gallic, with shades of the clavecinistes—Rameau, Couperin—in the elaborately ornamented Sarabande theme and several of the variations. In time-honoured fashion, the figuration grows increasingly animated during the early variations. Variations 9 to 16 are in G minor, beginning with a tender contrapuntal meditation on the theme—one of Handel’s most poetic keyboard inventions. By the time the major key re-emerges in variation 17, Handelian virtuosity is again in full spate. We can imagine the composer playing this Chaconne on his colourful two-manual Ruckers harpsichord at home in Brook Street, to the astonished delight of privileged visitors.

The first movement is an abbreviated sonata form in 2/4 time, and is 44 measures long. It follows the pattern of modulation from tonic to dominant in the first section, with a ten bar central section before the recapitulation of the original material in G major. The movement is lively and has a two-voice texture. It presents rhythmic challenges such as triplets surrounded by duplets and off-beat patterns, and also features contrapuntal lines and sixteenth note triplets.The second movement is a minuet without the trio, in standard 3/4 time, and is a brief 16 measures in length. It has rhythmic complexity; in the first four measures half notes, quarter notes, eighth notes, eighth note triplets and sixteenth notes are all encountered. The third movement is a short, 9 measure andante in common time, where the first half of the piece is composed of four bars which are repeated once, and the second half comprises five bars which are also repeated. It is melodic and well balanced and also features contrapuntal lines. The allegro finale is in 3/8 time and is 24 measures long. It is also composed of two halves, which are both repeated once. It is described as a fast and jocund movement, and is a good study in finger independence and facility. It features broken interval figuration, octaves, and both sustained and moving notes.

The first movement is in 2/4 time and 193 measures in length. It opens with arpeggios, and is elaborately figured with Alberti bass, scales, thirds, and ornamentation. It also makes use of broken triads, double notes, octaves, and trills.The second movement is in D minor in 3/4 time, and is 52 measures long. It is described as a slow arioso with many dramatic pauses and tempo fluctuations. The last bar of this movement is fragmentary, and does not have a bar line, nor a fermata to indicate the end of the movement. Instead, it is completed by the upbeat of the finale, moving into a faster tempo but with the same time signature of 3/4. This is one example of the few times that Haydn connects movements in his sonatas. The finale is 88 measures long and is in a double variation form.There are two themes, one major and one minor, which contrast effectively and lend themselves to development. The variations consist of many lively figurations, including fast scales and arpeggios divided between the left and right hands.

A wonderful slow and lyrical movement. The ornaments for the early beginners. Very easy, but due to the unexpected skips it teaches one to think ahead. Finalle: This is a fast exhilarating movement, very short, very repetitive in its broken chord figurations. Excellent for forearm rotation and bringing the bass melody over the mist of sound created by the very fast RH. Hands swap figurations occasionally, so both hands get a workout. If you hear this piece, you will not believe how easy it is (around grade 1/2).

The work is in theme and variation form, 320 measures long, and in 3/4 time. It is most likely scored for harpsichord. The tempo is allegretto. The theme is presented in two 8 bar melodic phrases accompanied by left hand triplets that are both repeated, followed by the variations. The first variation has triplet rhythms in the right hand, whereas the second variation has running sixteenth notes of a melody derived from the theme. The third variation has accompanying scale figuration in the left hand, introducing hand crossing. Variation 4 is a derivative of the original theme in the middle register of the keyboard. The fifth variation has right-hand sixteenths, and the sixth variation has fast accompanying activity in the left hand. Variation 7 features left hand chords. Variation 8 has a cantering rhythm, Variation 9 uses broken chords, the tenth variation features thirds and the eleventh exhibits octaves. Variation 15 is a similar to a French overture. Variation 17 is similar to a Solfeggio. Variation 18 is described as a pompous procession through the suspensions and trills, and Variation 19's thick, crashing chords are evocative of the "surprise" in Haydn's Symphony No. 94. The last variation demands an instrument tuned with a short octave, making a wider spread of chord possible.

This piece is the standard example of a ragtime style in the piano world. It features a typical ragtime stride bass pattern in the left hand, syncopated rhythms, and quick right-hand melodies played in octaves. All of these things require advanced technical skill.

Learn the LH ostinato figure by rote. Play this pattern up the C major scale. Improvise a 5-finger melody against the left hand ostinato. Play/imitate 5-finger patterns in a variety of touches and articulations. Familiarize the ear and hand by using the exact articulations from the piece. Maintain the bounciness of the LH rote exercises. Encourage close attention to the movements of wrist while executing precise RH articulations. Drill LH passages independently.
RH articulations and wrist motions can be drilled by focusing only on the first three notes, alternating from major to minor. Practice RH staccato leaps separately from the slurred passages for accuracy.

Liszt’s first Ballade is a pretty sadly underrated work, probably because its sibling in B minor, written around 10 years later, has a much more obviously ambitious narrative scope. But the first ballade too is a lovely work of great craft. It’s essentially a series of variations on two themes – a cantabile melody in thirds, and a contrasting gently humorous march. The variations on the first theme are especially striking – all of them heavily emphasise the dominant and are built around untethering the movement of the melodic and non-melodic hands (hence all that hand-crossing). It’s the kind of ingenious textural exploration that Liszt would also deploy La Campanella, and generates some wonderful results here. [A little note: the first theme is actually in two parts, and in the analysis below I’ve separated the two parts when numbering variations to better take into account all of Liszt’s changes in texture.] The march theme, which constitutes the middle section of the work, rather sneakily integrates a motif first heard in the work’s introduction, and undergoes some pretty striking transformations to eventually turn, at its climax, into an anguished cry. (The transformation of Motif A into a heroic theme at 4:36 is also pretty neat.) After the middle section, the variations on the first theme resume, and a heart-stoppingly delicate, glittering final variation (7:04) leads into a final statement of the march theme, which closes the work.
INTRODUCTION
0:00 – An improvisatory line ascends out of the bass (it’s nice entertaining the thought that this is a homage to Chopin’s Op.23), followed by Motif A descending. This pattern is repeated, the second time with diminished 7th harmony.
A SECTION, in Db
0:43 – Theme 1a, a lush melody built around tonic/dominant oscillation, is introduced.
1:11 – T1a, Var.1. Languorous hand-crossing, with Ab pedals in RH.
1:39 – Theme 1b, beginning in the relative minor.
2:05 – T1b, Var.1. Trills in the upper register, then chromatic mediant colour at 2:17. 
2:38 – T1a, Var.2. Gentle cross-rhythms strongly emphasising the dominant, plus lots of free-hand-crossing. 
2:59 – T1a, Var.3. Broken Ab octaves gently daubing the entire upper half of the keyboard. Still more hand-crossing.
B SECTION, in A
3:24 – Theme 2, an initially hopeful, even self-deprecating march. Modulates into dark C# min at its tail.
3:46 – T2, Var.1. T2 moves up one octave, while the LH now places widely-spaced but nearly empty chords. The modulating tail now takes on a dramatic character and leads into
4:07 – T2, Var.2. Triumphant, in E, with an implied B pedal.
4:15 – Motif A makes a surprise return from the introduction, retaining its slightly tipsy character. But at 4:36, it’s suddenly diverted from its usual downward scurry and attains a rather triumphant sound.
4:48 – T2, Var.3, in F#. Broad and powerful, with lush chords in the LH. But the tail of the theme at 5:02 launches the melody into a sequence of increasingly dramatic modulations over a descending/ascending octave line in the LH, culminating in
5:19 – T2, Var.4. A climactic statement of the march in F# min, with agonising leaps in the LH. But then a zipper-like scale leads back to
5:31 – Motif A, now with alternating chords in both hands. Motif A is developed as before, taking on a more dramatic character, until it culminates in
6:00 – Two strepitoso octave descents, leading back to the
A SECTION, in Db
6:15 – T1a, Var.4. The theme now forceful, while Abs leap from the bass into the top registers of the piano. 
6:31 – T1a, Var.5 Leaping trills on Ab in the RH (hand-crossing inevitable), with occasional chromatic runs. (La Campanella vibes on this one)
6:48 – T1b, Var.2. Triplet runs in the RH, with decorative harmonic neighbour tones.
7:04 – T1b, Var.3. The most drastic transformation in this work. The melody dissolves into a series of downward arpeggiated runs that gradually descend the keyboard and grow in strength, reaching the
CODA
7:38 – T2 returns in ff, rapidly ascending the piano until m.188, when Motif A brings us back down to the final tonic-submediant oscillation at m.190 (this is the harmonic progression on which the march is built; see the LH at m.63).

The third Consolation is in D♭ major and initially marked as Lento placido. It is the most popular of the Consolations. The sonic design of the piano texture in this piece is brilliantly effective, divided cleanly between three distinctly separate areas of the keyboard: a ‘consolingly’ stable succession of fundamental notes deep in the bass, each lasting several bars at a time; a rippling pool of overtone notes in the mid- range either reinforcing or smudging those of the bass notes; and a soprano melody line splendidly isolated in the high register, like a diva in a pool of light on a dark stage.

Liszt is a composer known for the extreme difficulty of his compositions, and the No.2 Rhapsody would be a prime example of that. Liszt wrote a set of 19 Hungarian Rhapsodies, and the #2 is by far, the most popular one. It has 2 distinct sections, they're called lassan and friska. You can tell the difference between the 2 sections pretty easily. Lassan is the first section, it has a somewhat slow tempo with a dark and dramatic mood. Friska comes after that with lots of trills, arpeggios, jumps and scales with a much brighter mood and higher tempo. The lassan is by no mean easy, but it is much easier than the friska section. I'd say if you've studied for 3-5 years, i'd give it a try. For the friska section, i would not even bother touching it for probably a good 8 years. But different people learn at different paces, i've been told i was able to play a Chopin Preludes after 6 months of playing the piano and most people take 2-3 years. It's a very individualistic thing, and No. 2 Rhapsody is highly, highly advance, it takes a very competent concert pianist to execute it right.

The first part of the rhapsody is an introduction (Tempo giusto), where the left hand of the player plays a steady bassline made up of the chords in the D-flat major scale. Due to the overlapping of the melody over the bars, the piece does not sound as though it is in a 2
4 rhythm. This is because Liszt did not start the first chord of the piece as an upbeat, which is what many composers have done to relate to the time signature of the piece. The melody of the first part is repetitive, ending with a long cadenza mainly using the black keys. The second part (presto) is in C-sharp major (which is simply an enharmonic version of the previous D-flat, not a modulation) and has a lively rhythm, leading to the lassan in B-flat minor. The lassan is played slowly, with a rhythm in improvisational style, again finishing with a large cadenza at the end, leading sequentially to the friska (Allegro) in B-flat major. The melody is played in semiquavers requiring the player to move fast in octaves. The bass line repeats the same strong quaver rhythms. The final part of the piece ends with chromatic scales in octaves moving in contrary motion, leading to B-flat major chords. The piece makes use of the gypsy scale.

An ecstatic meditation built from almost-constant development of 4 motifs (A: the rising 4-note motif starting from m.5; B: the rising/descending octave figure in the LH of m.19, C: the LH descent in m.22; D: the melodic RH figure in m.25). The harmony here is striking: in m.6 you get an almost-fully voiced B13 chord (heard as Amaj7/Bsus2), for instance. The hair-raising passage from mm.77-112 is one of the best things Liszt wrote: it’s built from the tail of Motif A, and bereft of any sense of tonal centre. At m.89 you dwell on an F augmented maj7 chord, and the F7-Eb-Abm harmonic cell that repeats from m.94 is voiced so as to grind in the A in the RH against the Ab in the bass. (This harmonic cell is also deployed in reverse at m.185.)

This relatively short piece was composed by Liszt to celebrate and in many ways mimic the playing of the virtuoso violinist Paganini. It means the little bell and this quality features throughout the piece. Liszt had heard the great Paganini perform many years before this piece reached the form we know it in today. The initial composition titled “Grande Fantasie de Bravoura sur la Clochette de Paganini.” The grand title, unfortunately, did not give rise to a piece that gained much popularity, often being described as unmusical and even unplayable by some. In 1838 Liszt reworked the music, this time using the theme from the Rondo of Paganini’s 2nd Violin Concerto. “Grande Etude d’execition transcendante d’apres le Caprice de Paganini,” was no less modest a title but did result in a more charming and approachable piece of concert music. 
Finally, in 1851 the version of the work we are more familiar with today was completed. The texture of the music is effortlessly airy and light but the technical demands substantial. The key of G# minor would deter many pianists but actually, the dominance of black notes makes many of the passages slightly easier to execute at the speed indicated. It should be remembered that Liszt himself would have performed this piece on one of his many tours, reminding us what a superb pianist he was.

Liebestraum No. 3 in A-flat major is the last of the three that Liszt wrote and the most popular. It can be considered as split into three sections, each divided by a fast cadenza requiring dexterous finger work and a very high degree of technical ability. The same melody is used throughout the piece, each time varied, especially near the middle of the work, where the climax is reached. In that section, the melody is played by a series of octaves, followed by arpeggios.

The Sonata unfolds in approximately 30 minutes of unbroken music. While its distinct movements are rolled into one, the entire work is encompassed within an overarching sonata form — exposition, development, and recapitulation. Liszt effectively composed a sonata within a sonata, which is part of the work's uniqueness, and he was quite economical with his thematic material. The first page contains three motive ideas that provide the basis for nearly all that follows, with the ideas being transformed throughout.
Some analyses suggest that the Sonata has four movements[citation not found] although there is no gap between them. Superimposed upon the four movements is a large sonata form structure, although the precise beginnings and endings of the traditional development and recapitulation sections have long been a topic of debate. Others claim a three-movement form, a one-movement structure, and a rotational three-movement work with a double exposition and recapitulation.
The first theme is a descending scale marked sotto voce; full of ominous undertow. It reappears at crucial points in the work's structure. This leads immediately to a jagged, forceful motif in octaves. This is quickly followed by a hammering marcato motif in the left hand. A dialogue ensues, with mounting energy, until reaching the noble Grandioso material in D major. Liszt transforms the "marcato" motif into a lyrical melody later. The slow movement, an Andante sostenuto, is the centerpiece of the Sonata. This fully-fledged movement, in compound ternary form, features, in quick succession, a number of themes heard earlier in the Sonata in a tour de force of thematic economy. The final recapitulatory section is launched by a driving fugato of contrapuntal skill which leads to the compressed return of the opening material. Calling upon every intellectual resource and fully exploiting the pianist's technical arsenal, it is at this point where a performer's concentration might wane. But this final section has just begun, and a pianist needs to have reserved fuel in their tank if he is to turn in a successful performance of the Sonata. Each of the sections are examples of Classical forms, which means that this piece is one of the first instances of Double-function form, a musical piece which has two classical forms happening at the same time; one containing others. Already in 1851 Liszt experimented with a non-programmatic "four-movements-in-one" form in an extended work for piano solo called Grosses Concert-Solo. This piece, which in 1865 was published as a two-piano version under the title Concerto pathétique, shows a thematic relationship to both the Sonata and the later Faust Symphony.

There might just be too many good things to say about this recording, which is by a not inconsiderable margin the best performance of this piece available.
For a start, the composition itself is extraordinary. It's the most difficult of the entire set, with the demands it places on the agility of the 4th and 5th fingers, along with tricky and very rapid hand-crossing and some large LH leaps (take a look at 02:02, where all three are rather obscenely combined). But that's only the beginning: the real trick is maintaining some semblance of melody (see for example 01:14) and sustaining maddening pianissimos throughout the piece. Liszt is also at his most musically innovative here: the diminished scale features prominently in the glittering downward runs in the right hand. This might be one of the very earliest uses of the diminished scale in classical music. It's also hard not to see the beginnings of a sophisticated impressionism in here: the dramatic structure of the piece, its sudden tonal changes, and its evocation of will-o-the-wisp is near-perfect.
And it's all played with inhuman accuracy and precision (and speed, which goes without saying) -- and far more importantly, with great musicality, incredible colouring/texture, and fine dynamic control. Kissin is not always superb, but here he is at his finest.

Lovely piece very easy technically, but demanding the greatest expressivity in playing. Probably better suited to older students. Good for awakening the skills for expression in one’s playing.

The eight volumes of Songs Without Words, each consisting of six songs (Lieder), were written at various points throughout Mendelssohn's life, and were published separately. The pieces are within the grasp of pianists of various abilities and this undoubtedly contributed to their popularity.

The Piano Sonata No. 18 in D Major, K. 576, was composed by Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart as part of a set of six for Princess Friederike of Prussia in 1789. It is often nicknamed “The Hunt” or “The Trumpet Sonata”, for the hornlike opening. The sonata, having a typical performance duration of about 15 minutes, is Mozart’s last. In a letter to a fellow Freemason Michael von Puchberg, dated July 12, 1789, Mozart wrote: “Meanwhile I am working on six easy piano sonatas for Princess Friederike and six quartets for the King”. Hermann Abert believed K. 576 to be one of these sonatas; however, Wolfgang Plath and Wolfgang Rehm stated in the Neue Mozart-Ausgabe that they doubted this, as K. 576 is demanding to play, often considered one of Mozart’s hardest sonatas, due to its technically difficult counterpoint passage

This famous piece features exciting and exotic sounds that are satisfying to hear and to play. The right-hand requires precise, clear articulation. The left-hand alternates between a simple accompaniment and strongly rolled chords.

The first movement, marked Allegro, is structured in sonata form; the exposition opens with a turning figure for the left hand, which forms the basis for much of this movement. After a repeat of the opening 2 bars, an Alberti bass is introduced for the left hand, whilst the right hand plays the melody based on the opening turning figure. The opening section uses chromatic appogiaturas for colour. An imperfect cadence leads towards the dominant (G major) in preparation for the 2nd subject, as expected. The second subject focuses on rapid scales and leads to a perfect cadence in G major, ready for the development section. The exposition is repeated, which is standard for sonata form. The development begins in G minor uses the opening theme to follow a series of ascending arpeggios in several keys before moving towards G major and then back to the tonic, C major, for the recapitulation. The recapitulation follows a similar structure to the exposition, although the imperfect cadence that led to the dominant previously now leads to the final 10 bars of the exposition, this time in the tonic key. The first movement ends with a perfect cadence and a three bar elaboration on the tonic.
The Andante is full of expressive shading, the result of Mozart's harmonic freedom. This movement is based in F major, the subdominant of the whole work's tonal home and is structured in sonata form. By the end of the exposition, Mozart has modulated to the dominant, C major and begins the development in this key. The work then quickly makes temporary transitions through G and D minor, in order to move back to the tonic for the recapitulation, which follows the exposition closely.
The Allegro is in 2
4 time, and is based in C major. This features an unusually active part for the left hand, another extended development section, and a surprising close: Mozart rounds the sonata off with two firm chords, which he marks Coda.

The subject is stated boldly in octaves, occurring twice in the first 8 bars. The subject remains strong until the transition, where the opening motif is taken one octave higher, and a scale-type passage modulates the key to the relative major, E♭ major. The second subject has some very graceful melodies supported by Alberti bass, which continue until the second half of the piece. This section uses material from the first and second subjects to form the development. The most unstable section harmonically, this goes through the keys of C major, F minor, G minor, and returning to the original part in C minor. The recapitulation occurs from bar 100 to 168, this time the second subject is in C minor instead of the E-flat major of the exposition, and the coda ends the piece from bar 168 to 185.
The principal subject of this movement is seven bars long, consisting mainly of bass broken chord accompaniment and a melody. The subject, however, sub-divides itself into regular one-bar sections, which is very unusual. At bar 8, the melody modulates immediately to the key of B♭ major, where a new melody is introduced. This carries on until the prolonged cadential extension from bar 13 to 16. The rest of bar 16 consist of a link on the dominant of E♭ major to the next section, so that the music can modulate back and repeat the original seven-bar melody again, with extra ornaments and decorations added to the melody.
The second section, or episode, begins in A♭ major. This melody starts off exactly the same as the second movement in Beethoven's Pathétique sonata. This first part of the episode modulates to a B♭ major cadence, which gives way to the second section of the episode, commencing in G♭ major. The same melody is repeated, followed by a sequential passage going through A♭ minor, B♭ minor, and C minor, ending on a half-cadence. Two more bars modulate back to E♭ major, where the original melody returns, embellished with decorations and ornaments to the maximum possible. The coda ends the movement, formed from previous material.
The last movement of this sonata is unlike many of Mozart's sonatas' last movements, which tend to have fast tempo and joyfulness and happiness. This movement contains a great tragic sense that really makes it stand out.
The subject, which is unusually long, consists of two parts, both ending with perfect cadences. The first is introduced quietly, with melody in the right hand accompanied by left hand chords, with much calmness. However the second has a great fiery sense to it. Both share distinct and separate ideas. This subject is ended by a prolonged cadential repetition.
There is no passage of transition to the second subject, only a basic chord on E♭'s dominant seventh. The second subject then contains Alberti bass in the left hand, with a dancing, flowing melody in the right hand, completely changing the character in the ringing key of E♭. The second part of this subject is in fact based on a passage of the right hand in the first movement. The bridge to the next section is modulated from E♭ major to C minor.
At this moment, we hear the original principal subject cut short into half. In its place, a dramatic series of chords of F minor's diminished seventh, lasting for just one bar. This then gives way to the middle section of F minor.
This motif is shown twice exactly the same, the first is shown, modulating into G minor, then C minor, where the same cut-in-half principal subject is heard. This is where the motif is repeated the second time, then giving way to the coda.
The coda is founded on the second subject, starting in bar 262, with the right hand leading the melody along with the left hand accompanying with broken chords. In bar 296, the Neapolitan sixth is found in C minor. The coda ends with a perfect cadence.

Mozart might be the most famous composer who ever lived, but that doesn’t mean that all of his pieces are incredibly difficult. In fact, he wrote this Sonata specifically for people just starting out on the piano – facile means ‘easy’ (though it’s not as easy as you might hope!). This is a great piece for beginners, or intermediate players who want to play a beautiful piece of Mozart without the breakneck semi-quavers.

The movement is cast in through-composed ternary form (ABA) with coda. Mussorgsky's original piano version of this movement begins fortissimo (ff), suggesting that the lumbering oxcart's journey begins in the listener's foreground. After reaching a climax (con tutta forza), the dynamic marking is abruptly piano (bar 47), followed by a diminuendo to a final pianississimo (ppp), suggesting the oxcart receding into the distance

One of the most recognizable classical pieces to learn is Johann Pachelbel’s Canon in D. It is often played at special events, such as weddings, and its chord progression is featured in many popular songs from today. Canon in D was originally composed for strings but has been transcribed for piano. The piece features eight chords that repeat in the left-hand, while the right-hand starts with a simple, pleasing melody and then increases in complexity as the piece progresses. If you are struggling to play with your hands together in a passage, remember that the left-hand is still based on those first eight notes and you can play just those individual notes while you are building confidence in playing with your hands together. Each time the melody begins again in the right-hand, compare it to the first time the right-hand began playing to see the similarities and differences. This will help make it easier to process the fast passages that appear later in the piece.

The aesthetic attribute most prized by the French is that utterly indefinable quality known as ‘charm’. Among its leading proponents among 20th-century composers is Francis Poulenc, whose picture-postcard piano suite Napoli whimsically evokes the seaside pleasures, the serene beauty and urban bustle of Italian life as seen through the lens of an urbane French tourist in Naples.
The opening Barcarolle imitates the rocking of a small boat lapped by the choppy waves of the sea. Its left-hand triplets of widely-spaced sonorities are pedalled into blurry billows of watery wetness while cross-rhythms in the right add an extra element of wobble to its cheery melodic flow.
The middle-movement Nocturne is all stillness and moonlight, with open sonorities sounding out across a wide swathe of the keyboard over a stabilizing pedal tone in the bass, interrupted only by melancholy musings of a sharper harmonic colouring in its central section.
The Caprice italien that ends the suite is a virtuoso tour de force modelled, according to the composer, after Chabrier’s Bourrée fantasque. Poulenc’s capricious finale, like its model, alternates chatty, slightly manic sections of moto perpetuo animation with more lyrical moments of reflection. The lyrical section at the centre of this movement is almost melancholy, its sudden outpouring of sentiment after so much cheekiness balancing precariously on the knife-edge of parody. 

The sonata is the shortest of his piano sonatas, being in a single movement in sonata form and lasting approximately 7–8 minutes, but it is one of the most technical demanding pieces Prokofiev has ever written for the piano. The piece opens with a blasting E major chord for the entire first and second bars and then goes into a toccata-like melody for the next few bars. This repeats with some variation again after that, and a tonic preparation for two bars leads to the first theme. The first theme, consists of a fairly recognizable harmony with a leaping melody in the right hand. The first theme is mainly in a playful and soft character with some dynamic fluctuations towards the end of the first theme. It contains some motives that reoccur near the end of the piece.
The second theme resembles the second movement in a typical three-movement sonata cycle, and opens in a slow and legato chromatic scale with sustained bass notes of G♯, D, and G, marked Moderato. The slow, lyrical melody opens in the relative major, then repeats itself with the same melody but with the harmony in A minor. The slow theme also consists of leaping harmony in the left hand, and the theme ends in C major after some progressions in C major.
The third theme, which is like a development, opens in a blasting, fortissimo chromatic harmony with a march-like melody in D minor with the same rhythmic motives alternating between hands. After that, there comes a rapid scale based on the notes F-E-D-F with double thirds in the bass. It then repeats a perfect fifth up, then proceeding with rapidly repeated Cs on the right hand on the upper registers. Following that is a series of arpeggios that suggest a melody or chord progression, then proceeding with a lyrical melody that comes from the second theme.
The climax is preceded with several leaping chords that gets transposed after a few bars. In the climax, marked fff, it starts with a rapid arpeggio in the supertonic 7th chord relative to C major, following pedal tones on C in the right hand and subsequent transpositions by seconds. It ends with a blasting fortissimo cluster-like chord, E-F-A-B-D-E (right hand), with E on the bass, then closing the theme with a similar chord on a lower octave, E-G-B-D (left hand), F-A-B-D-E (right hand).
The next theme and final theme begins with E tied from the previous chord, then with detached triplet eighths marked pianissimo that come from the piano parts of the first theme. The originality of this section comes from the direct omission of the first theme and the usage of the second theme in an almost unrecognisable way. After that is a coda-like theme with much dynamic fluctuation. At the last page comes a loud and march-like theme in A minor, then proceeding with arpeggios and chords in the tonic second inversion chord. Then comes with a very quiet C major arpeggio marked pp subito then comes with a loud ending theme that ends the piece. The piece ends with A minor chord in ff.

The first movement begins with a melancholy, and mysterious theme that wanders. The key is B♭ major but the sense of tonality is weak due to Prokofiev's frequent modulations to remote keys. After the theme ends, a development, reminiscent of the first movement of the Piano Sonata No.7, follows. Next is a more brooding theme in G minor which goes through a series of modulations as the music prepares for the development section. The development section is unstable and perpetuated by motoric rhythms. The third movement begins with several arpeggios, introducing one of the main themes, in B♭ major. Tonality is weak, as the very next theme is in A minor. After a brief return to B♭, it then introduces another theme in the key of B major. Then another theme enters, this one in C major. After the initial excited section, the piece enters into a waltz-like portion that is in D♭ major. This waltz-like section is full of dissonances. The piece finally quiets down, entering into a much quieter, more mysterious section, still in D♭. Throughout this section, the left hand includes references to the waltz-like section. Then after this section, the A minor theme returns, building into the return of the opening theme. The final section combines nearly all of the elements that have come before. Tonality is still weak. The C major theme enters transposed to B♭. Then the A minor theme returns, also transposed to B♭. There is a new theme, building up to a grand finale in B♭.

Waltz - A nice little waltz with unexpected turns of the harmony. Wonderfully tonal and yet very modern

The first piece has an andantino (moderate) tempo, is 113 measures long, and is marked at 72 quarter notes per minute. It is divided into three distinct sections. The first presents a theme in common time (4/4) with a typical nocturne figure for the left hand. A mid-piece pause at roughly the same area in Schubert's first Moments musicaux further emphasizes the influence of Schubert. The second part is marked con moto (with motion), at 76 quarter notes per minute, and is a variation of the first theme in the unusual configuration of seven quarter notes per measure (7/4). This part ends in a cadenza. The third section presents the last variation of the theme, again in common time, but in the fastest tempo yet, Andantino con moto, at 84 quarter notes per minute. The piece ends in a coda that returns to the first tempo, and repeats portions of the previous three parts. It ends with a perfect authentic cadence into B♭ minor.
Andantino is the longest in the set by playing time (about 8:30). It is described as a "generic-hybrid," combining elements of the nocturne and theme and variation genres.The melody is chromatic, syncopated, and long, all idiosyncratic elements Rachmaninoff often includes in his works. Because of this, the Andantino is sometimes called an extension of his Nocturne in A minor of the Morceaux de Salon set (Op. 10, No. 1, 1894). However, Andantino stands on its own with difficulties, such as the sections with multiple phrases in a single hand.

The second piece, referred to as a "glittering showpiece", is positioned in contrast to the lyrical and "atmospheric" melody of the first piece. The piece is in the quick tempo allegretto (quickly), at 92 quarter notes per minute. It is 131 measures long, the most of all six pieces, but the second shortest in terms of playing time, usually no longer than three and a half minutes (the shortest is number four).[2] This piece represents a typical nineteenth-century étude, similar in style to Frédéric Chopin's Études (Opp. 10, 25), with a melody interspersed between rapid sextuplet figures. It is in strict ternary form with a coda: identical beginning and ending sections beginning on measures 1 and 85, and a contrasting middle section starting on measure 45. The second section radically changes dynamics, constantly changing from piano to fortissimo and even sforzando. It is, throughout, a relentless torrent of descending half steps and a cascading left hand figure reminiscent of Chopin's Revolutionary Étude (Op. 10, No. 12, 1831). Ending the piece is a slow coda in Adagio (at ease) which closes with a plagal cadence in E♭ minor.
Rachmaninoff revised this piece in March 1940, changing the melody but leaving the constant sextuplets, proving that the rushing figures are not simple bravura or flair.

The continual gauntlets of number two are relieved by the third piece in the set, an "introspective rêverie [daydream]." Drawing on the previous illustration of a "generic hybrid," this piece is described as a mixture between the song without words and funeral march genres, to create what is called the "most Russian" piece of the set,containing both sonorous bass and a solid melody, characteristics of Russian music.
Comprising only 55 measures, this piece is one of the shortest but has one of the longer playing times of about seven minutes (4:30 if the repeat is not taken). The piece is structured as a three-part form. The theme of the first and second sections are played entirely in minor thirds, accompanied by a left hand figure of open fifths and octaves. The third section has the melody in minor sixths, alongside a staccato octave bass. The lament of the opening theme transforms into an explicit funeral march as the left-hand octaves become regular.

The fourth piece is similar to the second in the quality of its performance. The fourth piece reveals resemblance to Chopin's Revolutionary étude in the taxing left hand figure place throughout. The piece is 67 measures long, with a duration of about three minutes, and has the fastest tempo of the set, Presto (quick) at 104 quarter notes per minute, and is the shortest work in terms of playing time.
Left hand figure in opening Presto (top) and third section's Più vivo. The "registral displacement" (highlighted) alters certain notes in the familiar figure to increase tension.
Listen
Presto is in ternary form with a coda. The piece begins with a fortissimo introduction with a thick texture in the left hand consisting of chromatic sextuplets. The melody is a "rising quasi-military" idea, interspersed between replications of the left hand figure,[7] the mostly two-note melody being a strong unifying element.[1] The middle section is a brief period of pianississimo falling figures in the right hand and rising scales in the left. The third section is marked Più vivo (more life) and is played even faster than the intro, 112 quarter notes per minute. At this point the piece develops a very thick texture, with the original left hand figure played in both hands in varying registers. The technique of rapidly changing the octave in which a melody is played, sometimes called "registral displacement", is used to present the figure in a more dramatic form that increases the intensity of the ending. The ending, a coda in Prestissimo (very quick), 116 quarter notes per minute, is a final, sweeping reiteration of the theme that closes in a heavy E minor chord, which revisits Rachmaninoff's preoccupation with bell sounds, prominent in his Piano Concerto No. 2 and Prelude in C♯ minor (Op. 3, No. 2).
The piece is a major exercise in endurance and accuracy: the introduction opens in a left hand figure requiring span of a tenth interval. Additionally, octave intervals invariably appear before fast sextuplet runs, making quick wrists and arm action necessary. The double melodies Rachmaninoff uses in this work exists purposely to "keep both hands occupied," obscuring the melody and making it difficult for the right hand to project. This is the only piece in the set with indicated pedal markings.

The piece is similar to the form of a barcarolle, a folk song with a rhythmic tuplet accompaniment. Playing it takes approximately five minutes, and it is 53 measures long, the shortest in terms of measures. It is an adagio sostenuto (sustained at ease) at 54 quarter notes per minute, with a simple melody presented in ternary form.
Lacking any prodigious figures or difficult runs, the piece displays Rachmaninoff's capability for musical lyricism. Although the piece seems simple, the mood must be sustained by playing simultaneously restrained but dynamic triplet figures in the left hand. The melody, a chordal texture with frequent suspended tones, creates a difficult task in voicing, and placing the correct emphasis on the correct notes. Its relatively short melody lines are a direct contrast to Rachmaninoff's characteristically long lines, giving a shorter time to bring out the phrases.

The opening movement begins with a series of chromatic bell-like tollings on the piano that build tension/
In this first section the piano takes on the role of accompaniment, consisting of rapid oscillating arpeggios between both hands which contribute to the fullness and texture of the section's sound. After the statement of the long first theme, a quick and virtuosic "piu mosso" pianistic figuration transition leads into a short series of authentic cadences, accompanied by both a crescendo and an accelerando; this then progresses into the gentle, lyrical second theme in E♭ major, the relative key. The second theme is first stated by the solo piano, with light accompaniment coming from the upper wind instruments. A transition which follows the chromatic scale eventually leads to the final reinstatement of the second theme, this time with the full orchestra at a piano dynamic. The exposition ends with an agitated closing section with scaling arpeggios on the E♭ major scale in both hands.
The agitated and unstable development borrows motives from both themes, changing keys very often and giving the melody to different instruments while a new musical idea is slowly formed. The sound here, while focused on a particular tonality, has ideas of chromaticism. Two sequences of pianistic figurations lead to a placid, orchestral reinstatement of the first theme in the dominant 7th key of G. The development furthers with motifs from the previous themes, climaxing towards a B♭ major "più vivo" section. A triplet arpeggio section leads into the accelerando section, with the accompanying piano playing chords in both hands, and the string section providing the melody reminiscent of the second theme. The piece reaches a climax with the piano playing dissonant fortississimo (fff) chords, and with the horns and trumpets providing the syncopated melody.
While the orchestra restates the first theme, the piano, that on the other occasion had an accompaniment role, now plays the march-like theme that had been halfly presented in the development, thus making a considerable readjustment in the exposition, as the main theme, the arpeggios in the piano serve as an accompaniment. This is followed by a piano-solo which continues the first theme and leads into a descending chromatic passage to a pianississimo A♭ major chord. Then the second theme is heard played with a horn solo. The entrance of the piano reverts the key back into C minor, with triplet passages played over a mysterious theme played by the orchestra. Briefly, the piece transitions to a C major glissando in the piano, and is placid until drawn into the agitated closing section in which the movement ends in a C minor fortissimo, with the same authentic cadence as those that followed the first statement of the first theme in the exposition.
The second movement opens with a series of slow chords in the strings which modulate from the C minor of the previous movement to the E major of this movement.
Orchesterwerke Romantik Themen.pdf
At the beginning of the A section, the piano enters, playing a simple arpeggiated figure. This opening piano figure was composed in 1891 as the opening of the Romance from Two Pieces For Six Hands. The main theme is initially introduced by the flute, before being developed by an extensive clarinet solo. The motif is passed between the piano and then the strings.
Then the B section is heard. It builds up to a short climax centred on the piano, which leads to cadenza for piano.
The original theme is repeated, and the music appears to die away, finishing with just the soloist in E major.
The last movement opens with a short orchestral introduction that modulates from E major (the key of the previous movement) to C minor, before a piano solo leads to the statement of the agitated first theme.
After the original fast tempo and musical drama ends, a short transition from the piano solo leads to the second theme lyrical theme in B♭ major is introduced by the oboe and violas. This theme maintains the motif of the first movement's second theme. The exposition ends with a suspenseful closing section in B♭ major.
After that an extended and energetic development section is heard. The development is based on the first theme of the exposition. It maintains a very improvisational quality, as instruments take turns playing the stormy motifs.
In the recapitulation, the first theme is truncated to only 8 bars on the tutti, because it was widely used in the development section. After the transition, the recapitulation's 2nd theme appears, this time in D♭ major, half above the tonic. However, after the ominous closing section ends it then builds up into a triumphant climax in C major from the beginning of the coda. The movement ends very triumphantly in the tonic major with the same four-note rhythm ending the Third Concerto in D minor.

The first movement is in sonata-allegro form. The piece revolves around a diatonic melody which Rachmaninoff claimed "wrote itself". The theme soon develops into complex and busy pianistic figuration. The second theme opens with quiet exchanges between the orchestra and the piano before fully diving into the second theme in B♭ major. The first part of the first theme is restated before the movement is pulled into a loud development section in C minor which opens with toccata-like quavers in the piano and reaches a loud chordal section. The whole development exhibits features similar to a canon, such as an eighth note passage in the piano in which the left hand and the right hand play overlapping figures. The movement reaches a number of ferocious climaxes, especially in the cadenza.
Rachmaninoff wrote two versions of this cadenza: the chordal original, which is commonly notated as the ossia, and a second one with a lighter, toccata-like style. Both cadenzas lead into a quiet solo section where the flute, oboe, clarinet and horn individually restate the first theme of the exposition, accompanied by delicate arpeggios in the piano. The cadenza then ends quietly, but the piano alone continues to play a quiet development of the exposition's second theme in E♭ major before leading to the recapitulation, where the first theme is restated by the piano, with the orchestra accompanying, soon closing with a quiet, rippling coda reminiscent of the second theme.
The second movement is constructed around a theme and variations, in an ABACA form, while shifting around various home keys. The theme and first two variations are played by the orchestra alone. The piano then plays several variations with and without the orchestra.
After the first theme development and recapitulation of the second theme, the main melody from the first movement reappears, before the movement is closed by the orchestra in a manner similar to the introduction. The piano ends the movement with a short, violent "cadenza-esque" passage which moves into the last movement without pause. Many melodic thoughts of this movement allude to Rachmaninoff's second piano concerto, third movement, noticeably the Russian-like E♭ major melody.
The third movement is in a modified sonata-allegro form, and is quick and vigorous.
The movement contains variations on many of the themes that are used in the first movement, which unites the concerto cyclically. However, after the first and second themes it diverges from the regular sonata-allegro form. There is no conventional development; that segment is replaced by a lengthy digression in E♭ major, which leads to the two themes from the first movement. After the digression, the movement recapitulation returns to the original themes, building up to a toccata climax somewhat similar but lighter than the first movement's ossia cadenza and accompanied by the orchestra. The movement concludes with a triumphant and passionate second theme melody in D major. The piece ends with the same four-note rhythm – claimed by some to be the composer's musical signature – as it is used in both the composer's second concerto and second symphony.
Rachmaninoff, under pressure, and hoping to make his work more popular, authorized several cuts in the score, to be made at the performer's discretion. These cuts, particularly in the second and third movements, were commonly taken in performance and recordings during the initial decades following the concerto's publication. More recently, it has become commonplace to perform the concerto without cuts. A typical performance of the complete concerto has a duration of about forty minutes.

Polka de W.R. is in A-flat major and in 2/4. The piece starts with semi-quavers in the right-hand and a melody in the left. After four bars, this then progresses to a melody with a quaver followed by triplet semi-quavers underneath. Meanwhile, the left-hand plays a typical polka oom-cha rhythm with firstly a bass note and then a chord above. After twelve bars of this, there is then a melody in the right-hand and chords in the left. This continues for sixteen bars. There is then semi-quaver runs with the right hand, accompanied by more chords in the left. The tempo then changes to Poco piu mosso and the main theme starts. This is then followed by another tempo change to Meno mosso and a key change to C-sharp minor. There is then another theme, followed by intricate arpeggio patterns in both hands. After several bars of this, there is another modulation back to A-flat major. Another theme then proceeds until there are two bars of fast, arpeggiated patterns with a sustained chord in the left-hand. This is followed by a further theme until the end, where there is an arpeggio in both hands, a tempo change to Meno mosso, a short, two bar phrase with a melody above and chords below. There is then a penultimate, low pitched chord; followed by a higher pitched chord with a dynamic marking of pianissimo (pp)

Compared to Rachmaninoff's other pieces, this prelude is of lesser difficulty, but contains a few sections that require a bit of virtuosity. The beginning is manageable as long as you are able to firmly control and differentiate the sounding of the melody (three note motif) and the accompaniment. The triplet theme and middle section of the work is quicker and a little more challenging to properly play the theme. At the end of the triplet section, back and forth hand motion climaxes into four staffs, which is not only confusing, but tedious to read when you're used to only a bass and treble line. If anything, that section is the most challenging and will require the most practicing. At that point, you'll need to play extremely large chords that makeup the accompaniment as well as differentiate the sounding of the three note motif which gives the piece its fame.

The Prelude's taut structure is in ternary form, consisting of an opening "A" section with punctuated sixteenth-note chords (marked: Alla marcia, march), a more lyrical and melancholy "B" section with sweeping arpeggios in the left hand (marked: Poco meno mosso), a transition into the original tempo, and a recapitulation of the initial march.
The Alla marcia section is in itself in ternary ABA form. Within the first three measures of the Prelude, Rachmaninoff introduces the unifying factors of the piece (notwithstanding the Poco meno mosso section). First, the chordal march of measure one; second, the fragment on the second half of the beat in measure two; third, the fragment on the second half of beat two in measure three.
Measures 1–9 expand on the march theme. Following a cadence in the dominant, the section repeats in measures 10–16 with slight alterations and concludes in a G minor perfect cadence.
The "B" subsection of the Alla marcia section (measures 17–24) mirrors the rhythm of the first measure, presenting a sequence of related chords beginning with E♭.
In contrast to the Alla marcia, the "B" section introduces a lyrical chordal melody over an extended arpeggiated figure. Beginning in measure 35, a two-measure phrase is repeated and then serially extended in measures 39–41. A counter melody appears at measure 42 in the middle voice, intensifying the passage.
Following the middle section, the Prelude transitions to a recapitulation of the march section by gradual increases in tempo and dynamics. The section uses chromatically upward moving chords following embellished diminished seventh figures.
Finally, the piece ends in a highly original way: a short arpeggiated run to a high G, marked pianissimo.

The Prelude in D major Op. 23 No. 4 is a lulling nocturne. Its melody sings out from the middle of the texture, swaddled at first by a sonic glow of bell-like overtones, then topped with a gently undulating descant, and finally crowned with echoing chimes in the highest register.

The first movement of the second piano sonata is in sonata allegro form. The exposition begins with the first theme, which has a descending arpeggio that ends with a low B-flat octave followed by a B-flat minor chord. The first theme area lasts until a cadenza-like passage creates a bridge into the second theme area. The second theme is in D-flat major, with a chorale-like texture that contrasts with the brilliance of the first theme.
In the development section, which is split into three parts, there is much tonal instability with constantly changing key centers. Parts of this section use the left hand to imitate bells, with chromatic descending, alternating sevenths and thirds.
The recapitulation restates the first two themes in B-flat minor. The final section of an extension to the recapitulation alternates between B-flat major and B-flat minor, leaving the tonic unclear until the coda. The coda, clearly in B-flat minor, repeats two themes seen earlier in the movement.
The second movement of the Piano Sonata is in two-part ternary form. A seven-measure interlude in G major links the first and second movements, after which there is a relative minor key area (E minor). The second movement's main theme is based on a motive of a sequentially repeated falling third.
The second movement references material from the first movement, which is the first instance of cyclic unity in the sonata. For example, in the middle-section of this movement, the bell texture from the first movement is reestablished.
The third movement begins with a repetition of the interlude to the second movement, with the meter shifted from 4/4 to 3/4. This movement, again in sonata-allegro form, further utilizes cyclic unity by using themes from the first movement. The transition to the second theme area of the exposition introduces a new theme (in D major), unusual in sonata-allegro form.
The development section, as in the first movement, is also split into three sub-sections. Similar to the exposition, it uses themes from the first movement in addition to the new themes introduced in the exposition.
The recapitulation is in B-flat major, and states the first theme from the third movement only once. It utilizes another past theme expansively to lead toward the coda. The coda utilizes themes from the first movement and is highly chromatic and brilliant.

Rachmaninoff lays bare the tune’s repetitive patterning in a starkly simple presentation emphasizing the pathos of the melody’s unfolding in a succession of short sighs. What follows is a series of textural variations largely based on the underlying harmonic progressions in the theme. Or rather, two sets of variations, separated by an intermezzo.
The first set comprises Variations 1-13 in which the theme is at first left largely recognizable, its rhythmic outline merely altered within the bar. In Variations 5 to 7 a more punchy version of the harmonic pattern emerges, followed by another spate of introspection in Variations 8 and 9. Then momentum builds relentlessly from the scherzo scamper of Variation 10 to the aggressive jostling of Variation 13.
At this point Rachmaninoff pauses to regroup, both aesthetically and pianistically. He inserts an intermezzo in a free improvisatory style (with many parallels to the 11th Variation in his Rhapsody on a Theme of Paganini) that alternates mordent-encrusted thematic musings with scintillating washes of sparkling keyboard colour.
And then he seems to start over again, presenting us once again with the theme, but in the major mode and more richly, more darkly harmonized. It is the same melody, but it seems more world-weary, more resigned than when he heard it at first. There is an eerie sort of nostalgia that weighs it down, as if it had aged.

A canon at the octave. Rhythmically playful, as the trailing voice is two beats behind the leading. Starts off rather inward and reticent, before attaining a kind of luminous trepidation when it moves into Eb min. Then a swift move into D, triumphant, before returning into G min. Interesting to note how the voices are placed – at first the leading voice is in the RH, then both voices are in the RH, then they switch places in the D section.

A sly minuet whose strong third-beat accents make it sound like it’s in 3/2 time. At 10:21, a passage in pleasingly archaic Renaissance-era fauxbourdon (melody harmonized with notes a 6th and 4th below), contrasting with the dorian-to-the-point-of-sounding-like-the-whole-tone-scale colour of the middle section. The chromatic LH voice in the middle section supplies an unexpected undertone of grating menace.

His Fantasy on Hungarian Melodies dates from 1858 and uses the same slow-fast structure that Liszt used in his Hungarian rhapsodies. Its first section is strongly improvisatory in character, and makes much of the ‘Scotch snap’ rhythm (a short accented note followed by a longer one) typical of certain types of folk music. Rubinstein the virtuoso makes no attempt to hide his light under a bushel here, as he unleashes volley after volley of arpeggios up to the high register culminating in quicksilver janglings of tremolo, richly suggestive of the metallic thrumming of the Hungarian cimbalom (hammered dulcimer).
The second section is more rhythmically regular and features melodies purled out in chains of trills, batteries of octaves, and other trademarks of sonic mayhem typical of mid-19th-century pianistic exhibitionism.

No one’s quite clear what the word ‘gymnopédie’ means, but what is certain, is that Satie’s Gymnopédies, written in 1888, are some of the most simple and beautiful pieces of all time. And the great news is that they’re easy to play! Each of them are designed to be played ‘Lent’ (or slowly), which will be music to the ears of any beginner pianist…

The classical sonatas often dominate lists of piano repertoire, but Scarlatti’s baroque sonatas are definitely worth exploring as well. This one requires intricate finger work and quick hand crossings.

Scarlatti’s early career was based in Naples, and his introverted Sonata in B minor K 197 displays the recurring streaks of pathos that Neapolitan music revels in. The melodic line whimpers with plaintive little appoggiaturas as harmonic tension accumulates from the use of stubbornly immovable pedal points in the bass.

(D minor – Aria) Lyrical sonata much easier than it sounds. Slow and melancholic. Although just one page long it requires some musical maturity to be truly effective. This is an ideal piece to open a recital, since it is slow and introspective it will calm you down. This is a real gem. Only 24 bars long, technically unchallenging, and yet one of the most beautiful sonatas. Slow paced and exuding tranquillity, this reflective piece is the best of the four.

The D.946 Piano Pieces, written just months before Schubert’s death in 1828, are an uncannily good demonstration of how false that impression is – for while Schubert could certainly write a gorgeous melody, there is something cipherlike and subterranean about much of the music here, even when it seems to be at its most good-natured. In No.1, for instance, the agitation established in the A section never quite goes away, even when the music shifts into the major (0:44), by virtue of the boiling textures in the LH and the urgent dotted rhythms in the RH. Even in the B major trio there is something uneasy – for a start, the opening figure of the trio and the A section is virtually identical, and the trills tremolos in the trio retain a nervous quality. The second trio in Ab also opens with the same dotted upbeat that opens the A and B sections, and despite some beautiful writing in its first half moves into more twilit music terrain in its second half. [Aside: Schubert crossed out this section in his manuscript (https://tinyurl.com/y7y635ml), though this decision completely baffles me.] No.2 opens with a melody of Mendelsohn-ian sweetness, but its trios contain some of the bleakest music in the whole set. The first (in C minor) contains thirds muttering darkly over a menacing bass; even when it moves into the major it never remains completely comfortable (see the gently grating F# and Ab in the bass at 17:50, for instance). The second trio (in Ab min) has an intense, paralytic sadness, breaking into a kind of desperate anger in its B minor(!) middle section. No.3. is a study in contrast: the flanking sections are dancelike and helter-skelter, with their deceptive syncopations and 5-bar phrases, but the middle section hitches up the tonality by a rapt semitone to suddenly deliver a reverential chorale. Schubert’s casual mastery of modulation is on display throughout No.3, generating some ecstatic colours: see the section that begins at 28:16 and culminates at 28:30.

This particular arrangement for "Ave Maria" by Schubert here on this page is for piano solo. You'll be playing both (singing) melody part and the accompanying bass lines by yourself. It is at an intermediate level (level 4). There are no specific damper pedal markings and fingering numbers suggested. Unlike Level 5 arrangement of "Ave Maria" by Schubert, in this level of arrangement, each hand plays only 1 note at a time. And the left-hand accompaniment bass line are not so spread out like Level 5. The widest you need to spread your left hand will be an octave. To fit both the melody part and accompaniment part nicely in a piano solo arrangement, we have changed the key from the original key of B flat major to G major. 

The leisurely and melodious opening movement (Allegro moderato) has several outstanding features, not the least of which is a gentle second theme that pays rhythmic homage to the Allegretto of Beethoven's Seventh Symphony (neither the first nor the last time Schubert would pay such tribute to that movement). The harmonies surrounding the opening theme are rich and full, but the tune itself is crafted from translucent material. Schubert calls for the entirety of the development and recapitulation to be repeated, something common in the eighteenth century but almost unheard of in Schubert's music. The central Andante has an almost obsessive aspect to it, not reduced in any way by the absolute saturation of the movement with a single rhythmic thought; as the opening music is reprised in the second half of the movement, Schubert allows the two hands to play in canon with one another. Humor, or at least playfulness, is a key ingredient of the finale -- just listen to the stop and go rhythm of the second subject, a nd to the way that the forzando chords of the coda briefly get lost within their own chromatic sphere. The final bars of the Sonata are as tender a recount of the opening melody, pianissimo and molto legato, as one can imagine.

Beautiful haunting melody with 16th note acompanying figure split between the hands, somewhat like some of Mendelsohnn's SWWs.

On the night of 17 February 1854, Schumann, suffering from severe aural hallucinations, claimed that he heard angels dictating a theme to him. If Clara Schumann’s diary entries are to be believed, Schumann immediately wrote down the theme, and on either 22 or 23 February started writing variations on it. (All that survives of this first draft is a single page of music, and so we cannot know if at this stage Schumann completed work on the variations, though is likely he had not). At 2 in the afternoon of 27 February Schumann tried to drown himself in the icy Rhine; he was rescued by bargemen who dragged him ashore. The next day he returned to these variations and (it seems) completed them. He sent the work to Clara, but by then she had already left to stay with a friend at the advice of a doctor. On 4 March Schumann voluntarily committed himself to an asylum in Endenich, where he would die just a little over 2 years later. 
The Geistervariationen (“Ghost Variations”) are Schumann’s last work. He did not seem to realise that the lovely chorale theme that he wrote down was one he had used several times before: in the 2nd mvt of his Violin Concerto in D min (in a fragmentary form), the 2nd mvt of his 2nd String Quartet, and the Lieder-Album für die Jugend (No.19, Frühlings Ankunft, with a different harmonic colour). Clara forbade the publication of the work (we don’t know why – possibly they were too personal, possibly she thought it was not musically up to par with Schumann’s earlier work), and it was only until 1939 that the work saw print, although Brahms wrote a set of 4-hand variations on Schumann’s theme in 1861.
The Ghost Variations are, like most of Schumann's late work, extraordinarily intimate. All the variations cleave closely to the original theme, never quite departing its soundscape, and the original melody is always present. Rather than dissect the theme, the variations eavesdrop on it: Var. 1 adds triplet counterpoint in a middle voice; Var.2 unfolds as a touching canon; Var.3 opens the theme up just slightly by placing it in the LH and giving the RH gossamer-light triplet figuration; and Var.4 drains the theme of some of its warmth with intricate note placement, glacial and clear as ice. Var.5 represents something of a break from the earlier variations; it follows the harmony of the original theme exactly, but at first blush can be hard to recognise as related to the original theme. There is for the first time something disturbing here: both upper melody and middle-voice accompaniment are awash with chromatic grace notes, with the middle voice chromatic notes given to the LH in a way that just about suggests they have a separate life of their own. If emphasised, as Levit does (19:29), these LH nonharmonic notes create a gently dissonant haze in which the melody is nearly lost – kaleidoscopically beautiful and broken at the same time. Given what we know about the circumstances of this work’s composition, it is hard to be musically objective, but it seems that there is no more appropriate ending to a work that also bookended Schumann’s life. (We’re not even entirely certain if the work is complete – Schumann might have ended it where it did because he was unable to write more, and on purely intuitive grounds I'm inclined to believe this is the case.)

Begins as if in the middle of a phrase, with deceptive rhythms. ABA structure: two anguished sections flanking a lyrical middle one writing entirely in fleeting semiquavers.

This piece is made from a four measures phrase and two more phrases that are a variation of the original phrase.
A motive appears on the higher voice in the first two measures. The middle voice figure will be present throughout the piece. Several chord extensions are used by the composer, like the major ninth (B) and the minor ninth (Bb) in the first measure. A secondary diminished chord precedes the dominant chord in the second beat of the second measure. The first two measures are repeated to create the first phrase. Another secondary diminished chord of the V degree, this time over a dominant pedal in measure 6. This phrase, like the first one, is four measures long and is made by repeating the first two measures. The second phrase is the only phrase in the piece that ends in tonic.
The third phrase starts with a B minor chord but the chord is used as a second degree of the A major key. This phrase is also a variation of the first phrase. The piece ends by repeating the first phrase. It ends with a dominant chord. The composer may want to suggest the pleading child but it also prepares the next piece that is in the D major key.

Schumann believed that this was the most difficult piece he’d ever heard or composed. On a first hearing and by comparison with some of the pieces that follow in this article, you could be forgiven for imagining that this was a relatively simple piece to perform. Toccata’s as a musical form were more common in the Baroque and lost popularity during the following musical periods. One of the characteristics of the toccata is fast flowing notes that thread through an entire piece. This is precisely what we hear in this seven-minute Schumann work. It is unrelenting and makes strenuous demands on any piano player including extremely difficult stretches that open the work. It is, however, a testament to Schumann’s own virtuosity and perhaps the early foretaste of the complexities of his later symphonic works.

The work consists of three movements, typically lasting about 28 minutes in total:
The main theme in the first pmovement is introduced by the piano and then transferred to the orchestra while the piano accompanies in octaves.
The second movement begins in the key of F-sharp major which was for Scriabin "a ‘bright blue’ mystic key".[1] It is in the form of theme and variations. The orchestra introduces the theme. The piano enters with the first variation, accompanying the orchestra's theme with arpeggios. The second variation is faster, marked allegro scherzando. The third variation is a slow funeral march. The fourth variation is marked allegretto and features intricate ornamentation; the clarinet introduces the melody, and interweaves counterpoint with the soloist. The movement ends with return of the theme to the orchestra, almost identical to the first variation.
Third movement also develops material from the first movement. The first theme is condensed into the first two bars followed by a virtuosic arpeggio.

Alexander Scriabin's Prelude in C major, Op. 11, No. 1, was composed in November 1895 in Moscow. Here Scriabin's virtuosic sustain pedaling assembles clusters of up to seven different diatonic notes in an exquisite sonority that Scriabin himself used to describe as a "psychic shift".
The whole melody of this prelude consists of 240 eighth-notes, being the opening chord of this piece C–D–E–F–G–A, with the C-major tonic in the bass. The time value for each eighth note changes whenever the tempo flexes, as can be noticed in the second group of notes in the 2nd bar, which measures less than half the tempo of the second group in the 14th bar. This piece has 26 bars and takes about one minute to be played with a Vivace tempo marking.

The tenth sonata is in closer dialogue with Sonata Form than some of his other sonatas. It opens with a few desolate notes, forming an augmented chord and then a diminished chord. Then, it moves on to a simple chromatic theme, and then back to the opening theme. Scriabin then introduces the luminous trills that pervade the rest of the piece, and then moves on to a third theme with a chromatically descending melody. Following the sonata format, these three themes take on a modified form in the development before settling down to the recapitulation.
During the middle portion, the feverish buzzing rises to an orgasmic climax that thrusts both hands' trills into the upper register of the instrument. The very first, single-line gesture of the piece is not given again until after the richly-varied "recapitulation" has been made; it arrives quite unexpectedly, and is punctuated by a falling fourth in the bass that ends on C natural -- a pitch that, in his last music, assumes great significance for Scriabin, who came to view it as a kind of cleansing tonal focus.[1]
Like Scriabin's other sonatas, it is both technically and musically highly demanding for the pianist. A typical performance is about 12 minutes. Notable recorded performances of this piece include that of Scriabin’s son-in-law and musical champion, Vladimir Sofronitzky, and that of the great pianist Vladimir Horowitz, who also championed many of Scriabin’s works throughout his long career.

The first piano sonata may be the most aggressively modern of Shostakovich's early works. The thematic elements sound atonal, but beneath all the muscular running chromaticism is a persistent tonal center in C. The one-movement sonata changes tempo a dozen times, but to the listener it boils down to a fast section, a slow section, and a fast section. The slow part creates more tension than repose, and the sonata as a whole conveys a feeling of constant and relentless motion. Shostakovich's former piano teacher called it a "sonata for metronome accompanied by the piano." Unlike the trio, it remained a favorite of Shostakovich for years: he played it often in his concerts, perhaps because he thought it a perfect vehicle for his brand of virtuosity.

A typical performance takes approximately 25 minutes.
The restless mood of the first movement is established by the running sixteenth notes which begin the sonata, leading to a melodic line which is a verbatim quote in retrograde of the opening motif of Shostakovich's Symphony No. 1. This is followed by the appearance of a march-like theme in E-flat, accompanied by triads in the same key, before ebbing away into a chromatic closing subject. A fortissimo climax is capped by the combination of the movement's two main subjects, clashing against each other bitonally in B and E-flat. Following this is the "Largo" second movement, which mixes ternary and rondo forms. It has been likened to a waltz, as well as drawn commentary for its forecasting of the textures and moods of Shostakovich's late music. The finale begins with the statement of a thirty-measure theme which is then developed upon by nine variations; allusions to the compositions of Nikolayev, as well as to what would later become Shostakovich's musical monogram appear. The final variation closes the sonata with a recollection of its opening.

Stravinsky’s joyous & psychedelically colourful transcription of 3 Movements from Petrushka. I’d heard some of Stravinsky’s other piano music before I got around to this, & didn't get the impression he was a terribly good composer for the instrument – but by the time I finished with this, I was like: Yeah, alright, he's a genius at this too. Just think of the number of textures here that you find basically nowhere else – the rapidfire planing chords at the beginning of the Russian Dance (weird to use the term planing, since the technique is used in such a drastically different way from Debussy), the bassoon line that peeps out from the middle of the texture at 0:55, the muted chordal tremolos at the beginning of The Shovetide Fair, the shy oboe at 8:44, the exuberant canon over the E pedal at 14:01, & all those wild passages of bright, obsessively folkish counterpoint (the 5 main melodies in The Shovetide Fair are derived from Russian folk songs, it turns out). And’s it’s not just about these moments – the whole piece just reverberates with such an unusual & compelling style – percussive & anti-lyrical yet intensely melodic, with long passages constructed from the repetition of tiny motivic cells. Plus there’s the lovely harmony too – from the lydian/dorian colour at the beginning (which then slips right to the opposite end of the dark/bright spectrum by deploying the Locrian #2 at 0:20 – the E seems tonicized in the RH, but there’s also that Bb in the LH), the dirty chords punctuating the end of the Russian Dance, the ecstatic 7th chords at 9:13 (when the violins let the melody loose), the tritone-ized folk tune at 9:50 – all great stuff.

On the basis of the original song genre, Tchaikovsky chose 4/4 beat instead of the original 6/8 beat, making the rhythm feel cheerful and compact. At the same time, the use of double-point octave chords vividly expresses the tense atmosphere of people hunting. In the performance of these works, these magnificent chords require the player's full power to play with full spirit, and also need some strength control skills. In order to play the momentum of the top of the sea, the player first needs to turn the fingers, wrists and arms into a whole, with the wrist as a fixed, with the arm directly to the finger, the height of the force is concentrated, and the keyboard is quickly and forcefully hit. It is required to press the keyboard to the end at the moment of touching the key, and after a strong sound, quickly pull out the keyboard and continue to tap the next set of chords in the same way 

In this concerto, the pianist has little time to get in the zone before the solo part begins. For me, it feels like relief, both from a technical and structural standpoint. Everything has been so tumultuous until now, and the introduction of the second theme is the first time in the piece where we can be a little more intimate. Of course, the passion is still there, but it is expressed very differently. The most exciting passage for me would probably have to be the famous octave passage towards the end of the exposition. The build-up towards this passage is absolute insanity, and to finish it off with these titanic octaves feels extremely fulfilling.The cadenza is the first movement's biggest challenge, says Yang, adding, "It's quite diverse in its virtuosity as well (e.g. octaves, chords, running notes). On top of all that, you have to make sure that the different components of the cadenza are all connected to each other, so it makes for a decent challenge. One of the challenges of the third movement is maintaining synchronization with the orchestra. There is a strong tendency in this movement for the pianist to lean forward in terms of tempo. It would be safest to stay in one tempo, given the fast tempo required of this movement (making it more susceptible to falling apart), but if you do decide to incorporate any abrupt accelerandos or tempo fluctuations, make sure you let the conductor know.

Structurally, the four movements are connected by the 'Grand Motif' introduced in the first movement, though it is expressed in a variety of contexts. The first movement is written in common sonata-allegro form, and an array of techniques are used to mimic orchestral colors. The themes presented are undoubtedly Russian, but the composer's strict observance of Western musical tradition is still prevalent. The second movement is a melancholy Andante which lends itself to Tchaikovsky's natural gift for lyricism. It is considerably longer than the two movements that follow it.
The third movement is a brief, fast-paced Scherzo, and foreshadows some of the techniques later used by Sergei Rachmaninoff and Alexander Scriabin, mainly in its melodic direction.
The fourth and final movement is a galloping Allegro that is very much characteristic of Tchaikovsky's musical style. After sections of difficult passage-work, the sonata closes with an exuberant coda.
The average playing time is about 31 minutes.

Very slow and heavy

Piano Sonata No. 2 in A flat, begun in 1814 and completed in 1816, was obviously intended as a display vehicle for the composer’s considerable talents as a pianist. Weber had a huge mitt of a hand, which made the daredevil leaps and elephantine chords of the score much easier to manage for him than for mere mortals. Brilliance is the dominant characteristic of the keyboard writing in this sonata, combined with a preference for getting a full sound out of the instrument by dint of throbbing chords in the mid-range while the right hand frolicks high in the treble like a sportive child at a water park. The colourful, scintillating textures of Chopin can be heard on the horizon in this kind of keyboard writing.
More captivating still is Weber’s sheer delight in piano tone, allied to what his biographer John Warrack described as “the new expressive content he showed that music could hold.” This emphasis on the poetic is evident from the opening bar of the Piano Sonata No. 2: a hushed tremolo in the left hand intoning an infinitely soft quivering octave on A flat that allows a horn-like broken-chord melody to blossom above it. These tremolos are more than just incidental colouring. They recur with dramatic force in the tumultuous development section, both at its outset and its climactic conclusion, giving the impression of a sonata movement that is really aspiring to be a dramatic scene from one of Weber’s operas.
The second movement Andante is a theme and variations that begins with an unusual texture of sustained melody notes in the treble over a sparse harmonic accompaniment that vanishes as soon as it sounds, like a kind of musical ‘Snapchat’ message. The variations are as ingenious for their keyboard textures as for the musical ideas they develop.
The third movement is called a Minuetto but it is really an outrageously theatrical scherzo, full of off-beat rhythms and razz-ma-tazz, out-of-the-blue sound gags. The Trio is somewhat more lyrical, but hardly soothing, with its rapturous flights of passion in the right hand urged on by anxiously throbbing chords in the left.
The rondo finale, with its chromatically dribbly main theme, graciously disposed in neatly balanced phrases, is remarkable for the amount of important thematic play it gives to the left hand, although right-hand sparkle is certainly not lacking in the more display-oriented sections of this movement. What is unusual in such a showpiece is how Weber ends the work quietly, with a modest tapering off of the piano sound he loves so much.

